Guidelines to respect,  pr otect and fulfil the  righ ts of the child in the digital en vironmentBuilding a E urope f or and with childrenwww.coe.int/children
Guidelines to respect,  pr otect and fulfil the  righ ts of the child in the digital en vironmentRec ommendation CM/Rec(2018)7  of the C ommittee of Ministers C ouncil of Europe
French edition:Lignes dir ectrices relatives au respect, à la pr otection et à la réalisation des droits de l’ enfant dans l’environnement numériqueRec ommandation CM/Rec(2018)7 du C omité des Ministres aux États membresA ll requests concerning the reproduction or tr anslation of all or part of this documen t should be addressed to the Dir ectorate of Communication (F-67075 S trasbourg Cedex or publishing@coe.int).  A ll other correspondence concerning this documen t should be addressed t o  Directorate General of DemocracyC over and layout: Documents and P ublications Production Department (SPDP), C ouncil of Europe P hoto: © Shutterstock © C ouncil of Europe, September 2018P rinted at the Council of Europe
 ► Page 3ContentsFORE WORD 5 REC OMMENDATION CM/REC(2018)7 OF THE COMMITTEE OF MINISTERS TO MEMBER  STATES ON GUIDELINES TO RESPECT, PROTECT AND FULFIL THE RIGHT S OF THE CHILD IN THE DIGITAL ENVIRONMENT7 PREAMBLE 7 GUIDELINES  TO RESPECT, PROTECT AND FULFIL THE RIGHTS OF THE CHILD  IN  THE DIGITAL ENVIRONMENT11 1 . PURPOSE AND SCOPE11 2 . FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES AND RIGHTS12 2.1. B est interests of the child12 2.2. E volving capacities of the child12 2.3. R ight to non-discrimination12 2.4. R ight to be heard13 2.5. D uty to engage other stakeholders13 3 . OPERATIONAL PRINCIPLES AND MEASURES TO RESPECT, PROTECT AND FULFIL  THE RIGHTS OF THE CHILD IN THE DIGITAL ENVIRONMENT13 3.1. A ccess to the digital environment13 3.2. R ight to freedom of expression and information14 3.3. P articipation, right to engage in play and right to assembly and association15 3.4. P rivacy and data protection16 3.5. R ight to education18 3.6.  The right to protection and safety19 3.7. R emedies22 4 . NATIONAL FRAMEWORKS23 4.1. L egal framework23 4.2. P olicy and institutional frameworks24 4.3. C o-operation and co-ordination at national level28 5 . INTERNATIONAL CO-OPERATION AND CO-ORDINATION29 

 ► Page 5Foreword A s a human rights organisation, a key aim of the Council of Europe in the digital en vironment is to offer an open, inclusive and secure internet (and other ICTs) to all, including  children, while ensuring the protection of their human rights. Through its thema tic and transversal strategies, the Council of Europe is taking action to protect childr en in the digital environment, to empower them and to protect them from the violenc e they may be subject to in all settings.T he digital environment shapes children’s lives in many ways, creating opportunities and  risks to their well-being and enjoyment of human rights. With the adoption of  the Guidelines to respect, protect and fulfil the rights of the child in the digital en vironment, governments are invited to review their legislation, policies and pr actices to ensure that these adequately address the full range of the rights of the child . States should also ensure that business enterprises and other key partners meet  their human rights responsibilities and are held accountable in case of abuses, while  also fostering businesses’ engagement and co-operation where appropriate. A s such, these guidelines, when read together with the Council of Europe Strategy f or the Rights of the Child (2016-2021), the Internet Governance Strategy (2016-2019) as  well as the Human Rights Guide to Internet Users, form a solid set of ground rules which  can assist states in providing the necessary basis for looking after children’s best in terests in the complex but fascinating world of the digital environment.One  of the strengths of the Council of Europe is its ability to adopt legal standards, which  support states in putting systems in place that contribute to ensuring the r espect for human rights, promoting democracy and protecting the rule of law. Given the  speed at which new technologies emerge, the guidelines also propose measures t o address risks facing children as they learn and explore in this virtual world.Snežana S amardžić-Marković Dir ector General of Democracy

 ► Page 7Recommendation  CM/Rec(2018)7 of the  C ommittee of Ministers t o member States on G uidelines to respect,  pr otect and fulfil the  righ ts of the child in the digital en vironment( Adopted by the Committee of M inisters on 4 July 2018 at the 1321st meeting of the M inisters’ Deputies)P reambleT he Committee of Ministers, under the terms of Article 15. b of the Statute of the C ouncil of Europe,C onsidering that the aim of the Council of Europe is to achieve a greater unity bet ween its members for the purpose of safeguarding and promoting the ideals and  principles which are their common heritage, inter alia by promoting common policies and standar ds;R eaffirming the commitment of member States to ensure that every child enjoys the  full range of human rights enshrined in the United Nations Convention on the R ights of the Child (UNCRC), in the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and  Fundamental Freedoms (ETS No. 5), and their protocols, and that these rights should  be fully respected, protected and fulfilled, as technology continues to develop;Ha ving regard to the obligations and commitments as undertaken within other rel-ev ant international and European conventions, such as the revised European Social Char ter (ETS No. 163), the Convention for the Protection of Individuals with regard to A utomatic Processing of Personal Data (ETS No. 108), the Convention on Cybercrime (E TS No. 185) and its Additional Protocol concerning the criminalisation of acts of a r acist and xenophobic nature committed through computer systems (ETS No. 189), the  Council of Europe Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings 
Page 8 ► Guidelines(CETS No. 197), the Council of Europe Convention on the Protection of Children against  Sexual Exploitation and Sexual Abuse (CETS No. 201), the Convention on P reventing and Combating Violence against Women and Domestic Violence (CETS No . 210) and taking into account the recommendations, resolutions and declarations of  the Committee of Ministers and of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of E urope in this field;R ecognising that the digital environment is complex and subject to rapid evolution, and  is reshaping children’s lives in many ways, resulting in opportunities for and risks t o their well-being and enjoyment of human rights;C onscious that information and communication technologies (ICTs) are an important t ool in children’s lives for education, socialisation, expression and inclusion, while at the  same time their use can generate risks, including violence, exploitation and abuse;B earing in mind the Council of Europe Strategy for the Rights of the Child (2016-2021),  which identified the rights of the child in the digital environment as one of its  priority areas, and the Council of Europe Internet Governance Strategy (2016-2019),  according to which the internet should be a safe, secure, open and enabling en vironment for everyone, children included, without discrimination;R ecognising that children are entitled to receive support and guidance in their disc overy and use of the digital environment, respecting the rights and dignity of childr en and others;D etermined to contribute effectively to ensuring that consistent policies are being devised , with the participation of children, that take into account the interdepen-denc e of opportunities and risks in the digital environment and the need to ensure tha t appropriate measures are in place so that the rights of the child are respected, pr otected and fulfilled;Emphasising  that States have the primary responsibility to respect, protect and fulfil the r ights of the child, and reaffirming the rights, role and responsibility of parents or  carers to provide, in a manner consistent with the best interests and evolving capacities  of the child, appropriate direction and guidance for children to exercise their r ights;R ecognising also that business enterprises have a responsibility to respect human r ights, including the rights of the child, as affirmed in Recommendation CM/Rec(2016)3of  the Committee of Ministers to member States on human rights and business, the Unit ed Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child General Comment No. 16 (2013) on  State obligations regarding the impact of the business sector on children’s rights, the  United Nations Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights (2011), the C ouncil of Europe Guidelines for the c o-operation between law enforcement and in ternet service providers against cybercrime (2008), the Human Rights Guidelines f or Internet service providers (Council of Europe and EuroISPA) (2008) and the Human R ights Guidelines for online games providers (Council of Europe and ISFE) (2008), and  the Children’s Rights and Business Principles (2012) drawn up by UNICEF, the UN Global C ompact and the NGO Save the Children;
Recommendation CM/Rec(2018)7 ► Page 9Conscious that policies in this area require a combination of public and private, legal  and voluntary measures, that all relevant public and private stakeholders share r esponsibility for ensuring the rights of the child in the digital environment, and that c o-ordination of their actions is necessary;T aking into account the views and opinions of children consulted in member States of the C ouncil of Europe;R ecognising the need to develop guidance to assist States and other relevant stake-holders  in their efforts to adopt a comprehensive, strategic approach for respecting, pr otecting and fulfilling  the rights of the child in the digital environment, rooted in  the standards established by the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child  and the Council of Europe and underpinned by the meaningful participation of childr en,R ecommends that the governments of the member States:1. review their legislation, policies and practice to ensure that they are in line with the  recommendations, principles and further guidance set out in the appendix of  this recommendation, promote their implementation in all relevant areas and  evaluate the effectiveness of the measures taken at regular intervals, with the par ticipation of relevant stakeholders;2. ensure that this recommendation, including the guidelines in the appendix, is tr anslated and disseminated as widely as possible among competent authori-ties  and stakeholders, including parliaments, specialised public agencies and civil  society organisations, as well as children, in a child-friendly manner and thr ough accessible means, modes and formats of communication;3. require business enterprises to meet their responsibility to respect the rights of the  child in the digital environment and to take implementing measures, and enc ourage them to co-operate with relevant State stakeholders, civil society or ganisations and children, taking into account relevant international and E uropean standards and guidance;4. co-operate with the Council of Europe by creating, implementing and moni-t oring strategies and programmes that respect, protect and fulfil the rights of the  child in the digital environment, and share, on a regular basis, examples of  strategies, action plans, legislation and good practices related to the imple-men tation of this recommendation;5. examine the implementation of this recommendation and the guidelines in its  appendix within the Committee of Ministers and with the participation of  relevant stakeholders every five years at least and, if appropriate, at more fr equent intervals.

 ► Page 11Appendix to Recommendation CM/R ec(2018)7 G uidelines to respect,  pr otect and fulfil the  righ ts of the child in the digital en vironment1. P urpose and scopeI nternational and European binding instruments and standards set out obligations or pr ovide benchmarks for member States to respect, protect and fulfil the human r ights and fundamental freedoms of children in the digital environment. Every child, as  an individual rights-holder, should be able to exercise his or her human rights and fundamen tal freedoms online as well as offline.T he present guidelines are intended to provide assistance to relevant stakeholders in  the implementation of the rights enshrined in international and European human r ights conventions and standards, in the light of the case law of the European Court of Human R ights. They seek in particular to:a. guide States in formulating legislation, policies and other measures to promote the  realisation of the full array of the rights of the child in the digital environ-men t and address the full range of ways in which the digital environment aff ects children’s well-being and enjoyment of human rights;b. promote the devising, implementation and monitoring by States of a com-pr ehensive strategic and co-ordinated approach, reflecting the principles c ontained in the present guidelines;c. ensure that States require business enterprises and other relevant stakehold-ers  to meet their responsibility to respect the rights of the child in the digital en vironment and encourage them to support and promote these rights;d. ensure concerted action and co-operation at national and international level t o respect, protect and fulfil the rights of the child in the digital environment.
Page 12 ► GuidelinesFor the purpose of this text:► “child” refers to any person under the age of 18 years;► “digital environment” is understood as encompassing information and com-munica tion technologies (ICTs), including the internet, mobile and associated t echnologies and devices, as well as digital networks, databases, content and ser vices.2. F undamental principles and rightsT he principles and rights set out below should be read as applying to all sections of these guidelines .2.1. B est interests of the child1. I n all actions concerning children in the digital environment, the best interests of  the child shall be a primary consideration. In assessing the best interests of a child , States should make every effort to balance, and wherever possible, reconcile a  child’s right to protection with other rights, in particular the right to freedom of e xpression and information as well as participation rights.2.2. E volving capacities of the child2. T he capacities of a child develop gradually from birth to the age of 18. Moreover, individual  children reach different levels of maturity at different ages. States and other  relevant stakeholders should recognise the evolving capacities of children, including  those of children with disabilities or in vulnerable situations, and ensure tha t policies and practices are adopted to respond to their respective needs in rela-tion  to the digital environment. This also means, for example, that policies adopted t o fulfil the rights of adolescents may differ significantly from those adopted for y ounger children.2.3. R ight to non-discrimination3. T he rights of the child apply to all children without discrimination on any g rounds. All rights are to be granted without discrimination of any kind, irrespec-tiv e of the child’s age, and the child’s or his or her parents’ or legal guardians’ race, c olour, sex, language, religion, political or other opinion, national, ethnic or social or igin, property, disability, birth,1 or other status.4. W hereas efforts should be undertaken to respect, protect and fulfil the rights of each  and every child in the digital environment, targeted measures may be needed f or children in vulnerable situations, recognising that the digital environment has the  potential both to increase children’s vulnerability and to empower, protect and suppor t them.1.  United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child, Article 2.1.
Appendix ► Page 132.4.R ight to be heard5. Childr en have the right to express themselves freely in all matters affecting them,  and their views should be given due weight in accordance with their age and ma turity.6. S tates and other relevant stakeholders should provide children with information on  their rights, including their participation rights, in a way they can understand, and  which is appropriate to their maturity and circumstances. They should enhance oppor tunities for them to express themselves through ICTs as a complement to fac e-to-face participation. Children should be informed of mechanisms and services pr oviding adequate support, and of procedures for complaints, remedies or redress should  their rights be violated. Such information should also be made available to their  parents or carers to enable them to support children in exercising their rights.7. F urthermore, States and other relevant stakeholders should actively engage childr en to participate meaningfully in devising, implementing and evaluating leg islation, policies, mechanisms, practices, technologies and resources that aim to r espect, protect and fulfil the rights of the child in the digital environment.2.5. D uty to engage other stakeholders8. I n accordance with relevant international standards, States have the primary obliga tion to respect, protect and fulfil the rights of every child within their jurisdic-tion  and must engage all relevant stakeholders, in particular educational and child pr otection and care systems, public institutions and business enterprises, civil society stakeholders , as well as children themselves and their parents, legal guardian or any other  person who takes care of the child, in order to effectively implement these obliga tions.9. C oncerning the digital environment, each State should apply such measures as  may be necessary to require that business enterprises meet their responsibility t o respect the rights of the child in all their operations within the State’s jurisdiction, and , as appropriate, in all their operations abroad when domiciled in its jurisdiction. F urthermore, States should encourage and support by other relevant means busi-ness en terprises in understanding and respecting the rights of the child.3. O perational principles and measures to respect, pr otect and fulfil the rights of the child in the digital en vironment3.1. A ccess to the digital environment10. A ccess to and use of the digital environment is important for the realisation of childr en’s rights and fundamental freedoms, for their inclusion, education, participa-tion  and for maintaining family and social relationships. Where children do not have ac cess to the digital environment or where this access is limited as a result of poor c onnectivity, their ability to fully exercise their human rights may be  affected.1 1.S tates should make appropriate arrangements to ensure that all children have adequa te, affordable and secure access to devices, connectivity, services and content 
Page 14 ► Guidelineswhich is specifically intended for children. Insofar as this is possible, in dedicated public  spaces, States should take measures to render access to the digital environ-men t free of charge.12 .S tates should ensure that access to the digital environment is provided in educa tional and other care settings for children. Specific measures should be taken f or children in vulnerable situations, in particular children living in alternative care, childr en deprived of liberty or whose parents are deprived of liberty, children in the c ontext of international migration, children in street situations and children in rural c ommunities. In particular, States should require online service providers to ensure tha t their services are accessible by children with disabilities.13. C onnectivity and access to devices, services and content should be accom-panied  by appropriate education and literacy measures, including those which addr ess gender stereotypes or social norms that could limit children’s access and use of t echnology.14. S tates should ensure that terms and conditions that are associated with the use  of a device which can connect to the internet or that apply to the provision of online  services or content are accessible, fair, transparent, intelligible, available in the  child’s language and formulated in clear, child-friendly and age-appropriate language wher e relevant.15. S tates should ensure a plurality of sources of high-quality information and educa tional digital content and services for children. Children’s rights should be taken  into account in related public procurement procedures, for instance for edu-ca tional tools, so that access to and use of digital services and content is not unduly r estricted by commercial interests or filters.3.2. R ight to freedom of expression and information16. T he digital environment has considerable potential to support the realisation of  children’s right to freedom of expression, including to seek, receive and impart inf ormation and ideas of all kinds. States should take measures to guarantee children’s r ight to hold and express any views, opinions or expressions on matters of importance t o them, through the media of their choice, and irrespective of whether or not their view s and opinions are received favourably by the State or other stakeholders.17. Childr en, as creators and distributors of information in the digital environment, should  be made aware by States, especially through educational programmes, of ho w to exercise their right to freedom of expression in the digital environment while r especting the rights and dignity of others, including other children. In particular, such pr ogrammes should address aspects such as freedom of expression and legitimate r estrictions thereon, for example to respect intellectual property rights or prohibit incit ement to hatred and violence.18. S tates should initiate and encourage the provision of diverse high-quality online  content and services of social and cultural benefit to children in support of their  fullest development and participation in society. This should include the largest possible  amount of high-quality content that is specifically made for children, easy f or them to find and understand, provided in their language, and which is adapted 
Appendix ► Page 15to their age and maturity. In this context, information on the rights of the child, including  in the digital environment; on news; on health; and on  sexuality, among other  resources of benefit to them, is particularly important. In particular, States should  ensure that children are able to locate and explore public service media and highquality content likely to be of benefit to them.1 9.W here States make provision for media, these should involve children in active f orms of communication, encouraging the provision of user-generated content and establishing  other participatory schemes. Attention should also be paid to children’s ac cess to, and presence and portrayal in, media online.20. A ny restrictions on children’s right to freedom of expression and information in the  digital environment should comply with international and European human rights c onventions and standards. States should take measures to ensure that children are inf ormed of restrictions in place, such as content filtering, in a manner appropriate to their  evolving capacities, and that they are provided with guidance on appropriate r emedies, including on how and to whom to make a complaint, report an abuse or r equest help and counselling. Where appropriate, parents or carers should also be inf ormed of such restrictions and appropriate remedies.3.3. P articipation, right to engage in play and right to assembly and asso ciation21. T he digital environment provides distinctive opportunities for the rights of the  child to participate, to engage in play and to peaceful assembly and association, including  through online communication, gaming, networking and entertainment. S tates should co-operate with other stakeholders to provide for access of children t o such activities that can foster participation, inclusion, digital citizenship and r esilience both online and offline.22 .R ecognising children’s right to engage in play and recreational activities appr opriate to their age and maturity, States should provide a range of incentives, in vestment opportunities, standards and technical guidance for the production and distr ibution of digital content and services of social, civic, artistic, cultural, educational and  recreational benefit to all children. This includes interactive and play-based tools tha t stimulate skills such as creativity, teamwork and problem solving appropriate t o their evolving capacities and with particular attention to the needs of children in  vulnerable situations. Where children participate in the creation or production of these  tools, measures should be in place to protect the child’s intellectual property r ights.23. S tates should provide children with information appropriate to their age and ma turity, including in non-written forms and through social networking and other media,  on their rights, in particular their participation rights. States should also inform them  of the opportunities available to them, and where they can get support to take adv antage of these opportunities.24 .S tates should take measures to ensure that children are able to participate effec-tiv ely in local, national and global public-policy and political debates and to support the  development of online civic and social platforms to facilitate their participation and  their enjoyment of the right to assembly and association, strengthening their 
Page 16 ► Guidelinescapacity for democratic citizenship and political awareness. States should also ensure tha t children’s participation in the digital environment is acted upon meaningfully, building  on existing good practice for child participation and available tools for assessmen t.25. S tates should take measures to protect children exercising their right to peac eful assembly and association in the digital environment from monitoring and sur veillance, whether carried out by State authorities directly or in collaboration with pr ivate sector entities. Where such measures interfere with the exercise by children of  their rights, they should be subject to conditions and safeguards against abuse, in  line with international and European human rights conventions and standards. Notably , they should be prescribed by a law which is accessible, precise, clear and f oreseeable, pursue a legitimate aim, be necessary in a democratic society and pr oportionate to the legitimate aim pursued, and allow for effective remedies.3.4. P rivacy and data protection26. Childr en have a right to private and family life in the digital environment, which includes  the protection of their personal data and respect for the confidentiality of their c orrespondence and private communications.2 7.S tates must respect, protect and fulfil the right of the child to privacy and da ta protection. States should ensure that relevant stakeholders, in particular those pr ocessing personal data, but also the child’s peers, parents or carers, and educators, ar e made aware of and respect the child’s right to privacy and data protection.28. S tates and other stakeholders should ensure that children are made aware of ho w to exercise their right to privacy and data protection, taking into account their age  and maturity and, where appropriate, with the direction and guidance of their par ents, carers, legal guardians or other persons legally responsible for the child in a manner c onsistent with the evolving capacities of the child.29. R ecognising that personal data can be processed to the benefit of children, S tates should take measures to ensure that children’s personal data is processed fairly, la wfully, accurately and securely, for specific purposes and with the free, explicit, inf ormed and unambiguous consent of the children and/or their parents, carer or legal  representative, or in accordance with another legitimate basis laid down by la w. The data minimisation principle should be respected, meaning that the personal da ta processing should be adequate, relevant and not excessive in relation to the pur poses for which they are processed.30. W here States take measures to decide upon an age at which children are con-sider ed to be capable of consenting to the processing of personal data, their rights, view s, best interests and evolving capacities must be taken into consideration. This should  be monitored and evaluated while taking into account children’s actual understanding  of data collection practices and technological developments. When childr en are below that age and parental consent is required, States should require tha t reasonable efforts are made to verify that consent is given by the parent or legal r epresentative of the child.
Appendix ► Page 1731.S tates should ensure that the likely impact of intended data processing on the r ights of the child is assessed and that the data processing is designed to prevent or minimise the r isk of interference with those rights.32. S tates should ensure that the processing of special categories of data which ar e considered sensitive, such as genetic data, biometric data uniquely identifying a  child, personal data relating to criminal convictions, and personal data that reveal r acial or ethnic origins, political opinions, religious or other beliefs, mental and phys -ical  health, or sexual life, should in all instances only be allowed where appropriate saf eguards are enshrined in law.33 .S tates should ensure that easily accessible, meaningful, child-friendly and age -appropriate information about privacy tools, settings and remedies is made a vailable to children. Children and/or their parents or carers or legal representatives should  be informed by a data controller how their personal data is being processed. T his should include information for instance on how data is collected, stored, used and  disclosed, on their rights to access their data, to rectify or erase this data or objec t to its processing, and how to exercise their rights.34. S tates should ensure that children and/or their parents, carers or legal repre-sen tative have the right to withdraw their consent to the processing of their personal da ta, have access to their personal data and to have it rectified or erased, notably when  the processing is unlawful or when it compromises their dignity, safety or pr ivacy.35. I n relation to the processing of children’s personal data, States should imple-men t, or require relevant stakeholders to implement, privacy-by-default settings and  privacy-by-design measures, taking into account the best interests of the child. Such  measures should integrate strong safeguards for the right to privacy and data pr otection into devices and services.36. W ith respect to connected or smart devices, including those incorporated in t oys and clothes, States should take particular care to ensure that data-protection pr inciples, rules and rights are also respected when such products are directed pr incipally at children or are likely to be regularly used by or in physical proximity t o children.37. P rofiling of children, which is any form of automated processing of personal da ta which consists of applying a “profile” to a child, particularly in order to take deci-sions  concerning the child or to analyse or predict his or her personal preferences, beha viour and attitudes, should be prohibited by law. In exceptional circumstances, S tates may lift this restriction when it is in the best interests of the child or if there is  an overriding public interest, on the condition that appropriate safeguards are pr ovided for by law.38. Childr en shall not be subjected to arbitrary or unlawful interference with their pr ivacy in the digital environment. Measures which may restrict children’s right to pr ivacy must be carried out in accordance with the law, pursue a legitimate aim, be  necessary in a democratic society and be proportionate to the legitimate aim pursued . Surveillance or interception measures in particular must comply with these c onditions and should be subject to effective, independent and impartial oversight.
Page 18 ► Guidelines39.S tates should not prohibit in law or practice anonymity, pseudonymity or the usage of encr yption technologies for children.3.5. R ight to education40. S tates should actively invest in and promote the opportunities offered by the dig ital environment to realise children’s right to education. The goal of education is the  development of the child’s personality, talents and mental and physical abilities t o their fullest potential, and the preparation of the child for a responsible life in a fr ee society. In support of this goal, it is important that the knowledge and resources of  the digital environment are available to all children in a way that is inclusive and takes  into account children’s evolving capacities and the particular circumstances of childr en in vulnerable situations.D igital literacy41. S tates should promote the development of digital literacy, including media and  information literacies and digital citizenship education, to ensure that children ha ve the competence to engage in the digital environment wisely and the resilience t o cope with its associated risks. Digital literacy education should be included in the basic  education curriculum from the earliest years, taking into account children’s ev olving capacities.42. I n support of a wide range of rights of the child, digital literacy education should  include the technical or functional competences to use a wide range of online  tools and resources, as well as skills related to content creation and the critical understanding of the dig ital environment, its opportunities and risks.43. Dig ital literacy should be effectively promoted in the settings where children use  the internet, especially schools and organisations working with and for children. S tates should also promote and support the digital literacy of parents or carers through the  State’s established mechanisms for reaching parents as an essential means of cr eating a safer and sustainable digital environment for children and families.44. R ecognising the potential advantages of educational policies that use digital net works to connect formal and non-formal learning, including at home, States should  ensure that this does not disadvantage children who lack resources at home or liv e in residential institutions.45. P articular efforts should be made by States and other relevant stakeholders, thr ough the education and cultural system, to support and promote the digital lit eracy of children who have little or no access to digital technology for socio-geo-g raphical or socio-economic reasons, as well as sometimes for reasons of place of r esidence and also of children who have access to but do not use digital technology, who  lack the skills to use or underuse digital technology for reasons of vulnerability, in par ticular for children with disabilities.46. S tates should also make efforts to enhance the use of information and com-munica tion technology by girls and to promote the equality of opportunities and out comes for all children.
Appendix ► Page 19Educational programmes and resources4 7.S tates should ensure that sufficient high-quality educational resources, physical devic es and infrastructures are available to benefit children’s operation in the digital en vironment and support their formal, non-formal and informal education. These ma y be developed and distributed in co-operation with other relevant stakeholders. Such  provision should be evaluated according to current good practice and neces-sar y actions taken by States and other stakeholders to maintain high standards of educa tion relevant to the digital environment.48. S tates should develop and strengthen education and awareness-raising ini-tia tives and programmes and user tools for children, parents or carers, and educa-t ors and volunteers working with children, with the involvement of children. Such pr ogrammes should include knowledge on preventive measures, on rights and r esponsibilities in the digital environment, identification and reporting of violations, r emedies and available redress. Specifically, such programmes should teach chil-dr en to understand, as appropriate according to their age and evolving capacities, wha t it means to give consent, to respect other fundamental rights, their own and those  of others, to seek redress when needed and to use available tools to protect and  fulfil their rights in the digital environment. Furthermore, they should enable childr en to understand and deal with potentially harmful content (such as violence and  self-harm, adult pornography, child sexual abuse material, discrimination and r acism, hate speech) and behaviour (such as the solicitation of children for sexual pur poses or “grooming” , bullying or harassment, unlawful processing of personal da ta, violation of intellectual property rights), and potential consequences of the w ay in which information about children or shared by children might be further dissemina ted in different settings and by others.49 .F ormal and non-formal educational and cultural institutions (including archives, libr aries, museums, child and youth-led organisations, and other learning institu-tions)  should be supported and encouraged to develop and make available a variety of  digital and interactive learning resources and to co-operate across institutional boundar ies to optimise learning opportunities in relation to the digital environment.3.6. T he right to protection and safety50. T aking into account the development of new technologies, children have the r ight to be protected from all forms of violence, exploitation and abuse in the dig-ital  environment. Any protective measures should take into consideration the best in terests and evolving capacities of the child and not unduly restrict the exercise of other r ights.51 .T here are a number of areas of concern for children’s healthy development and w ell-being which may arise in connection with the digital environment, including but not limit ed to, risks of harm from:► sexual exploitation and abuse, solicitation for sexual purposes (grooming), online  recruitment of children for the commission of criminal offences, for par ticipation in extremist political or religious movements or for trafficking pur poses (contact risks);
Page 20 ► Guidelines►the degrading and stereotyped portrayal and over-sexualisation of women and  children in particular; the portrayal and glorification of violence and self-har m, in particular suicides; demeaning, discriminatory or racist expressions or apolog ia for such conduct; advertising, adult content (content risks);► bullying, stalking and other forms of harassment, non-consensual dissemina-tion  of sexual images, extortion, hate speech, hacking, gambling, illegal down-loading  or other intellectual property infringements, commercial exploitation (c onduct risks);► excessive use, sleep deprivation and physical harm (health risks).A ll of the above factors are capable of adversely affecting the physical, emotional and psy chological well-being of a child.M easures to address risks in the digital environment52 .B eing mindful of the speed at which new technologies can emerge, States should  take precautionary measures, including by assessing on a regular basis any r isks of harm that these may pose to children’s health, despite the absence of certainty a t that time with regard to scientific and technical knowledge of the existence or e xtent of such risks.5 3.S tates should promote and provide incentives to business enterprises to implemen t safety by design, privacy by design and privacy by default as guiding pr inciples for products and services’ features and functionalities addressed to or used b y children.54. W here States encourage the development, production and regular update by business  enterprises of parental controls to mitigate risks for children in the digital en vironment, they should ensure that such controls are developed and deployed tak ing into account children’s evolving capacities, and that they do not reinforce discr iminatory attitudes, infringe children’s right to privacy or deny children the r ight to information, in accordance with their age and maturity.P rotection and awareness-raising measures5 5.Specific measures and policies should be adopted to protect infants from pr emature exposure to the digital environment due to limited benefits with respect t o their particular physical, psychological, social and stimulation needs.56 .S tates should require the use of effective systems of age-verification to ensure childr en are protected from products, services and content in the digital environment which  are legally restricted with reference to specific ages, using methods that are c onsistent with the principles of data minimisation.5 7.S tates should take measures to ensure that children are protected from commer-cial  exploitation in the digital environment, including exposure to age-inappropriate f orms of advertising and marketing. This includes ensuring that business enterprises do  not engage in unfair commercial practices towards children, requiring that dig-ital  advertising and marketing towards children is clearly distinguishable to them as  such, and requiring all relevant stakeholders to limit the processing of children’s personal da ta for commercial purposes.
Appendix ► Page 2158.S tates are encouraged to co-operate with the media, with due respect for media fr eedom, with educational institutions and other relevant stakeholders, to develop a wareness-raising programmes aimed at protecting children from harmful content as w ell as preventing their involvement in illegal online activities.59. S tates should take measures to encourage business enterprises and other rel-ev ant stakeholders to develop and implement policies that address cyberbullying, har assment and incitement to hatred and violence in the digital environment. Such policies  should include clear information on unacceptable behaviour, reporting mechanisms and meaning ful support for children involved in such acts.60. S tates should share good practices on ways to address risks in the digital envi-r onment, in relation to both prevention and remedies. States should put in place public  awareness-raising measures about counselling, reporting and complaint mechanisms .M easures regarding child sexual abuse material61. P olicing with respect to child sexual abuse material should be victim-focused with  the highest priority being given to identifying, locating, protecting and pro-viding r ehabilitative services to the child depicted in such materials.62. S tates should continually monitor whether and how child sexual abuse mate-r ials are hosted within their jurisdiction and require law-enforcement authorities t o establish databases of “hashes” ,2 with a view to expediting actions to identify and  locate children subjected to sexual exploitation or abuse and apprehending per petrators.6 3.S tates should engage with business enterprises to provide assistance, including as  appropriate technical support and equipment, to law-enforcement authorities t o support the identification of perpetrators of crimes against children and collect evidenc e required for criminal proceedings.64. M indful of available technologies and without prejudice to the principles of liabilit y of internet intermediaries and their exemption from general monitoring obliga tions, States should require business enterprises to take reasonable, pro-por tionate and effective measures to ensure that their networks or online services ar e not misused for criminal or other unlawful purposes in ways which may harm childr en, for example in relation to the production, distribution, provision of access t o, advertising of or storage of child sexual abuse material or other forms of online child abuse .65. S tates should require relevant business enterprises to apply hash lists with a view  to ensuring that their networks are not being misused to store or distribute child se xual abuse images.2.  “Hashes” are a unique digital finger print assigned to digital files, including those that represent child  sexual abuse material. Hashes enable the rapid analysis of large quantities of data, obviating the  need to examine potential images of child sexual abuse individually. Hashes do not represent the image itself and cannot be r everse engineered to create child sexual abuse images.
Page 22 ► Guidelines66.S tates should require that business enterprises and other relevant stakeholders take  promptly all necessary steps to secure the availability of metadata concerning an y child sexual exploitation and abuse material found on local servers, make them a vailable to law-enforcement authorities, remove these materials and, pending their r emoval, restrict access to such materials found on servers outside of their jurisdiction.3.7. Remedies 67 .M ember States should ensure the effective implementation of their obligations under  Articles 6 and 13 of the European Convention on Human Rights (ETS No. 5), and  other international and European human rights instruments, to fulfil a child’s r ight to an effective remedy when their human rights and fundamental freedoms ha ve been infringed in the digital environment. This entails the provision of available, k nown, accessible, affordable, and child-friendly avenues through which children, as  well as their parents or legal representatives, may submit complaints and seek r emedies. Effective remedies can include, depending on the violation in question, inquir y, explanation, reply, correction, proceedings, immediate removal of unlawful c ontent, apology, reinstatement, reconnection and compensation.68 .Childr en should be provided with information and advice about remedies avail-able  at domestic level in a manner adapted to their age and maturity, in a language which  they can understand and which is gender and culture sensitive. Mechanisms and  processes in place should ensure that access to remedies is speedy and child-fr iendly, and provides appropriate redress to children.69 .S tates should ensure that in all cases access to courts or judicial review of administr ative remedies and other procedures are available, in line with the principles set  out in the Guidelines of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe on child-fr iendly justice (2010).7 0.S tates should, where appropriate, also provide children and/or their parents or legal  representatives with non-judicial mechanisms, administrative or other means t o seek remedy, such as through ombudspersons for children and other national human  rights institutions and data-protection authorities. The availability, adequacy and  effectiveness of these mechanisms for handling cases of violations or abuses of the  rights of the child in the digital environment should be reviewed on a regular basis .71. S tates, as the primary responsible entity, should take appropriate steps to pr otect children against human rights abuses within the digital environment by business  enterprises and to ensure that children have access to an effective remedy, including b y:a. implementing policies and measures to encourage business enterprises to establish  their own remedial and grievance mechanisms, in line with the effec-tiv eness criteria set out in the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human R ights, while ensuring that these mechanisms do not impede the child’s access t o the State-based judicial or non-judicial mechanisms;b. encouraging business enterprises to provide information which is accessible, age -appropriate and available in the language of the child about how to intro-duc e complaints and seek redress through remedial and grievance mechanisms;
Appendix ► Page 23c.requiring that business enterprises make available, on their platform or within their  service, easily accessible ways for any person, and in particular children, t o report any material or activity which causes them concern and that reports r eceived are dealt with efficiently and within reasonable timescales.4. N ational frameworks4.1. L egal framework72 .La ws and policies related to the digital environment should be assessed, at their  drafting stage, with regard to the impact that their implementation may have on  children’s enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms. States should r eview at regular intervals, and, where necessary, update legal frameworks to sup-por t the full realisation of the rights of the child in the digital environment.73 .A comprehensive legal framework should provide for preventive and protective measur es in relation to the digital environment; provide support measures for parents and  carers; prohibit all forms of violence, exploitation and abuse; include effective r emedies, recovery and reintegration services; establish child and gender-sensitive c ounselling, reporting and complaint mechanisms; encompass child-friendly mecha-nisms  for consultation and participation; and set up accountability mechanisms to figh t impunity.74. S tates should ensure that their legal frameworks encompass the full range of unla wful acts which can be committed in the digital environment, where possible f ormulated in a technology-neutral manner, leaving room for the emergence of new t echnologies. Such frameworks should include definitions of offences, criminal, civil or  administrative liability and sanctions for natural and legal persons, and provisions of  services for children. Due account should be taken of relevant instruments, such as  the Council of Europe Convention on the Protection of Children against Sexual Exploita tion and Sexual Abuse (CETS No. 201), the Convention on Cybercrime (ETS No . 185) and the Optional Protocols to the United Nations Convention on the Rights of  the Child on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography (2000) and  on a communications procedure (2011), which can serve as benchmarks for cr iminal law reform and wider reform of legal frameworks and services and can inf orm the development of an effective legislative framework.75. W here forms of peer-to-peer online violence or abuse breaches occur, States should , as far as possible, pursue suitable and adequate preventive and restorative appr oaches, while preventing the criminalisation of children. 76 .S tates should set up legal frameworks that apply to the processing of personal da ta of children and regularly evaluate the overall effectiveness of such frameworks. D ue account should be taken of the relevant international and European instruments which  refer to data-protection principles and rights, such as the Convention for the P rotection of Individuals with regard to Automatic Processing of Personal Data (ETS No . 108).77. L egal frameworks in place should provide that independent data-protection author ities are competent to address complaints made by children and/or their 
Page 24 ► Guidelinesparents or carers or legal representatives related to the unlawful processing of per-sonal  data of children and establish effective mechanisms which enable children t o seek rectification or erasure of their data if these have been processed contrary t o the provisions of domestic law or when children withdraw their consent. Upon r equest, relevant public and private stakeholders should be obliged to expediently r emove or delete such content free of charge.78 .S tates should create a clear and predictable legal and regulatory environment which  helps businesses and other stakeholders meet their responsibility to respect the r ights of the child in the digital environment throughout their operations.7 9.S tates should ensure that children or their legal representatives can seek c ompensation from perpetrator(s) for violations of their rights and abuses. Where appr opriate, consideration should be given to the establishment of funds for the c ompensation of child victims or measures or programmes aimed at providing ther apeutic or other support.Sp ecific requirements for the registry for a country code top-level domain80. W hen awarding a contract or licence to an entity to become the registry for a c ountry code top-level domain, States should include clear requirements to have due  regard to the best interests of children. Such requirements should cover, for e xample, a clear prohibition by the registry of the registration or use of any domain name  which advertises or suggests that child sexual abuse material may be available on an y domain within the registry’s purview and the establishment by the registry of  mechanisms to ensure that this policy is enforced, including by registrars and r egistrants. The same requirements should apply to the registration of generic top-lev el domains.81. W here a registrant proposes to establish or renew a site or service targeted a t children or used by children in substantial numbers within their country code domain,  States should ensure that the registry or other competent authority requires r egistrants to put in place appropriate child-protection policies. This may include, for e xample, requiring that neither the registrant nor anyone employed by the registrant in  connection with delivering the service or in managing any data generated by the ser vice has been convicted of acts of sexual exploitation or sexual abuse of children or other r elevant offences.4.2. P olicy and institutional frameworksO verall strategy and policy coherence82. I n order to achieve greater co-ordination and policy coherence across the full r ange of the rights of the child in the digital environment, States should establish a c omprehensive strategic national approach, and ensure that policies and measures ar e consistent and mutually reinforcing. This may include the adoption of a strategy or  action plan or the integration of specific attention to the rights of the child in the dig ital environment into existing action plans, strategies and policies in a consoli-da ted manner.83 .A comprehensive strategic national approach should identify competent bodies with  the responsibility and authority to implement the actions set out therein, contain 
Appendix ► Page 25realistic and time-specific targets, be supported by adequate human and financial r esources, and be based on current scientific knowledge, ongoing and sufficiently r esourced research and good practices.8 4.S tates should engage all relevant stakeholders, such as ombudspersons for childr en and other independent human rights institutions, education stakeholders, da ta-protection authorities, business enterprises and civil society, including child and  youth-led organisations, in the design, drafting, implementation and evaluation of  a national strategy or action plan. In particular, States should ensure that children ar e consulted and empowered to contribute to these processes, with their informed c onsent and according to their evolving capacities. Due weight should be given to childr en’s views. Children should be informed about how their views were taken into ac count and how these views influenced the decision-making process. Adequate r esources should be made available to ensure children’s meaningful participation.85. M ethodologies should be developed to assess progress and evaluate actions f oreseen by the national strategy or action plan at all levels and by all stakeholders. E valuations should be conducted on a regular basis with a view to identifying poli-cies  and measures that are appropriate and effective in respecting, protecting and fulfilling the r ights of the child in the digital environment.86. S tates should take appropriate measures to widely disseminate information on adopt ed strategies or action plans and their implementation. S ectoral policies87. S tates should ensure that policies and initiatives are informed by rigorous and up -to-date evidence about children’s experiences in the digital environment, in order t o map existing opportunities and risks for children, identify emerging trends and guide  the targeting of policy and resources to ensure children’s well-being in the dig ital environment.8 8.S tates should devise and implement policies that support educational, cultural and other institutional pr oviders of beneficial resources for children to make these a vailable to children, parents and carers in the digital environment.89. S tates should strengthen regulatory agencies’ responsibility for drawing up, implemen ting and enforcing standards and guidance relevant to the rights of the child in the dig ital environment.90 .S tates should take measures, including the drafting of policies, operational guidelines  and/or codes of conduct, to build awareness and support among business en terprises within their jurisdiction regarding their roles, responsibilities and impact on the r ights of the child, and their co-operation with relevant stakeholders.9 1.S tates should devise, within the national framework for child protection, a c omprehensive protection and safety policy within which the digital environment is  expressly addressed and to which all relevant stakeholders contribute, including childr en. Such a policy should take into account existing standards and guidance, 
Page 26 ► Guidelinessuch as the Council of Europe Policy Guidelines on integrated national strategies f or the protection of children from violence (2009).392. S tates should put in place strategies to prevent their citizens’ access to child se xual abuse material physically located in other jurisdictions, according to their o wn legislation or a set of internationally recognised criteria.93. S tates should engage business enterprises and other relevant stakeholders in  the implementation of their sectoral policies, notably the protection and safety polic y framework and related awareness-raising measures.A ddressing the risks and impact for the rights of the child94. S tates should require business enterprises and other stakeholders to undertake due  diligence in order to identify, prevent and mitigate their impact on the rights of the child in the dig ital environment.95 . States should require business enterprises to perform regular child-rights r isk assessments in relation to digital technologies, products, services and policies and  to demonstrate that they are taking reasonable and proportionate measures t o manage and mitigate such risks.96. S tates should encourage business enterprises to develop, apply and regularly r eview and evaluate child-oriented industry policies, standards and codes of conduct t o maximise opportunities and address risks in the digital environment.97. R ecognising that parents, carers and others may rely on an online service’s sta ted terms and conditions of service as a guide to the suitability of that service f or their child, being mindful of available technologies and without prejudice to the liabilit y of internet intermediaries, States should require business enterprises to take r easonable, proportionate and effective measures to ensure that their terms and c onditions of service are enforced.I nstitutional aspects, mechanisms and services9 8.S tates should ensure that institutions responsible for guaranteeing human and  children’s rights address within their mandate the rights of the child in relation t o the digital environment, for example through the promotion of digital literacy sk ills, high-quality standards for the production of digital content and services of social , educational and cultural benefit to children and child-friendly mechanisms f or consultation and participation.99. S tates should ensure that there are institutions or mechanisms responsible to r eceive, investigate and address complaints from children and their parents or legal r epresentatives about human rights violations or abuses in relation to the digital en vironment, employing child-sensitive procedures that ensure the child’s right to pr ivacy throughout and provide for monitoring and follow-up.100. C ompetent authorities should establish accessible, safe, confidential, age-ap-pr opriate and gender-sensitive counselling, reporting and complaint mechanisms, 3.  Recommendation CM/Rec(2009)10  of the Committee of Ministers to member States on integrated na tional strategies for the protection of children from violence, Appendix 1. 
Appendix ► Page 27for example through public bodies, hotlines, helplines and zero-rate chat applica-tions  managed by child helplines, and online platforms, as a core dimension of the na tional child-protection system, with appropriate links to child support services and  law-enforcement authorities, and, where appropriate, in close co-operation with e xternal stakeholders. This should include the provision of safe, child-friendly, free-ofcharge points of contact for children to report violence, exploitation and abuse in  the digital environment to the relevant authorities. Such mechanisms should ensur e the child or their parents’ or legal representatives’ right to confidentiality and anon ymity.101. S tates should encourage telecommunications companies to waive costs for inc oming calls to child helplines by means of toll-free telephone numbers.102. S tates should ensure there is an effective mechanism to allow any person to r eport anonymously the existence of suspected illegal material online, in particular child se xual abuse material.103. S tates should, as part of the child-protection system, ensure access to and pr ovide adequate and gender-sensitive support services and assistance for children whose  rights and privacy have been violated or who have been subjected to violence, se xual exploitation or abuse in the digital environment, including services to ensure the  child’s physical and psychological recovery and social reintegration, and prevent their r e-victimisation.10 4.S tates should ensure that appropriate sex-offender treatment programmes are a vailable for persons convicted of sexual offences involving children in the digital en vironment, and that services are made available to anyone concerned about the possibilit y of their committing a sexual crime involving a child, including in the dig ital environment.I nvestment, resources and training10 5.S tates should invest in hardware, software, connectivity, adequate bandwidth and t eacher training in schools to support learning.106. S tates should ensure that initial and in-service training informs and empowers educa tors so that they can support children in acquiring the skills and literacy needed t o exercise their rights in the digital environment.10 7.S tates should ensure that policies and measures provide educational institutions with  the resources, training and support needed to take preventive and protective measur es concerning children, including in school, against violence and abuses of  digital media, in ways that prevent escalation, provide appropriate support to childr en affected by and involved in such acts, provide redress and build resilience.10 8.S tates should take measures to ensure that adequate arrangements are in place t o implement screening processes and to provide guidance, advice and assistance t o any agency or employer who recruits staff or volunteers to work with children, including  within the digital environment, in order to prevent and reduce the risk of  individuals with a criminal record being recruited or placed in a position of trust vis-àvis children.
Page 28 ► Guidelines109.S tates should allocate adequate resources and provide initial and continuous tr aining for law-enforcement staff, members of the judiciary and professionals work-ing  with and for children. Such training should enhance their skills and knowledge of  the rights of the child in the digital environment, the risks children face online, ho w to recognise the signals that a child may be a victim of online harm, violence, abuse and e xploitation and what steps to take in response.110. S tates should invest in research and knowledge development, including child and  youth participation in the field of the rights of the child in the digital envi-r onment. Research should be conducted independently of relevant interests and should  be sufficiently detailed to differentiate children’s experiences by age, sex, socio -economic status and other factors that render children vulnerable or resilient in the dig ital environment.4.3. C o-operation and co-ordination at national level11 1.S tates should pursue a comprehensive strategic and co-ordinated multi-stakeholder  approach informing and engaging all relevant stakeholders, including na tional, regional and local law-enforcement and other authorities, educational and social-ser vice agencies, independent human rights institutions, data-protection author ities, professionals working for and with children, civil society, including child and  youth-led organisations, business enterprises, industry associations, researchers, families and childr en, in ways which are tailored to their roles and functions.112. S tates should designate an authority or create a co-ordinating mechanism to assess  developments in the digital environment that might impact the rights of the child  and which includes children in its decision-making processes, and ensure that their na tional policies adequately address such developments.11 3. States should set up co-operation frameworks, procedures and processes bet ween competent State authorities, independent authorities, civil society and business  enterprises, taking into account their respective roles and responsibilities, capacities and r esources.114. S tates should require platforms or providers of communication services to take  prompt and effective action in response to complaints of peer-to-peer or other online violenc e or abuse and to co-operate with national authorities.115. S tates should engage business enterprises, such as internet service providers and  social network providers, to play an active role in preventing and deleting illegal c ontent, as determined by law or by a judicial or other competent authority.116. S tates should encourage civil society stakeholders, as key catalysts in promot-ing  the human rights dimension of the digital environment, to actively monitor, ev aluate and promote children’s skills, well-being and related information literacy and  training initiatives, including actions undertaken by other stakeholders, and to dissemina te their findings and results.11 7.S tates should encourage all professional media outlets, and public service media in  particular, to be attentive to their role as an important source of information and r eference for children, parents or carers, and educators in relation to the rights of the  child in the digital environment, with due regard to international and European standar ds on freedom of expression and information and freedom of the media.
Appendix ► Page 295. International co-operation and co-ordination118. S tates should be encouraged to ratify and implement international instru -men ts relevant to the promotion and protection of the rights of the child in the dig ital environment. Such instruments include, inter alia: the Optional Protocols to the  United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child on the sale of children, child  prostitution and child pornography (2000), and on a communications proce-dur e (2011), the Council of Europe Convention for the Protection of Individuals with r egard to Automatic Processing of Personal Data (ETS No. 108), the Convention on C ybercrime (ETS No. 185) and its Additional Protocol concerning the criminalisation of  acts of a racist and xenophobic nature committed through computer systems (ETS No . 189), the Council of Europe Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human B eings (CETS No. 197) and the Council of Europe Convention on the Protection of Childr en against Sexual Exploitation and Sexual Abuse (CETS No. 201).119. S tates should co-operate with each other by applying relevant international and  regional instruments and arrangements, to the widest extent possible, for the pur pose of respecting, protecting and fulfilling the rights of the child in the digital en vironment. In particular, they should:a. have an adequate legal basis for providing assistance and, where appropriate, should  have in place treaties, arrangements or other mechanisms to enable efficien t co-operation with other States;b. ensure that their competent authorities can rapidly, constructively and effec-tiv ely use clear channels or mechanisms for the effective transmission and e xecution of requests for information and other types of assistance;c. have clear and efficient processes for the prioritisation and timely execution of r equests;d. not prohibit or place unreasonable or unduly restrictive conditions on the pr ovision of assistance or co-operation.120. S tates should support regional and international capacity-building efforts to impr ove policy and operational measures to respect, protect and fulfil the rights of the  child in the digital environment, including the pooling and sharing of successful educa tion and awareness-raising tools.121. S tates should co-operate with a view to promoting standardisation of content classifica tion and advisory labels among countries and across stakeholder groups t o define what is appropriate and what is inappropriate for children.122. S tates should expedite action to ensure that their law-enforcement agencies can  connect to the INTERPOL database that deals with child sexual abuse material.123 .R ecognising its wider role in relation to the management of the internet, S tates should actively engage with the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and  Numbers (ICANN) to press for the effective implementation of policies which will  enhance or sustain the rights of the child, in particular by ensuring that web addr esses which self-evidently advertise or promote child sexual abuse material or an y other offences against children are identified and removed, or not authorised t o be registered.
Page  30 ► Guidelines124. To facilitate implementation of these guidelines, member States should strengthen co-operation within relevant intergovernmental bodies, transnational networks and other international organisations.
The Council of Europe is the continent’s leading human r ights organisation. It comprises 46 member states, including all members of the E uropean Union. All Council of E urope member states have signed up to the European C onvention on Human Rights, a treaty designed to pr otect human rights, democracy and the rule of law. T he European Court of Human Rights oversees the implementation of the C onvention in the member states. www.coe.intThe guidelines to respect, protect and fulfil the rights of the child in the dig ital environment were adopted by the Committee of Ministers of the C ouncil of Europe on 4 July 2018. T his publication contains the recommendations, addressed to all member sta tes of the Council of Europe, followed by useful, thematically directed sec tions to guide states on fundamental principles and rights, operational principles  and measures to respect, protect and fulfil the rights of the child  in the digital environment, national frameworks and international c o-operation and co-ordination.T he purpose of the guidelines is to assist states and other relevant stak eholders in their efforts to adopt a comprehensive, strategic approach in building  and containing the often complex world of the digital environment. E nsuring children’s interaction and safety in this environment is paramount. A mong the many topics covered are the protection of personal data, pr ovision of child-friendly content adapted to their evolving capacities, helplines  and hotlines, vulnerability and resilience, as well as the role and r esponsibilities of business enterprises. In addition, the guidelines call upon sta tes to engage with children, including in decision-making processes, t o ensure that national policies adequately address developments in the digital en vironment.T hese guidelines are of interest to a very wide audience, ranging from na tional authority bodies, professionals, civil society, business and industry sec tors, to families and children themselves.EN GP rems 213624
