     EUCO 14/17          EN        European Council               Brussels , 19 October  2017   (OR. en)      EUCO 14 /17          CO EUR 17   CONCL 5              COVER NOTE   From:  General Secretariat of the Council   To: Delegations   Subject:  European Council meeting (19  October  2017)   – Conclusions      Delegations will find attached the conclusions adopted by the European Council at the above  meeting.    
Conclusions  – 19 October  2017       EUCO 14/17     1     EN    At the start of the meeting, the Member of the European Council representing the Member State  holding the six -monthly Presidency of the Council provide d an overview of progress on the  implementation of earlier European Council conclusions .  I. MIGRATION   1. The approach p ursued by Member States and EU institutions  to ensure full  control of the  external borders  is yielding results  and must be consolidated . Overall , migratory flows are  being significantly reduced  and the number of deaths at sea has decreased.   2. The European Council is determined to pursue its comprehensive, pragmatic and resolute  approach, and to apply it wherever necessary . This entails :   vigilance on  all migration routes  and readiness to react to any new trends;    a pragmatic, flexible and coordinated use of all available EU and Member States'  instruments;    support for Member States  directly affe cted or involved, including through continued  support from EU agencies;    strong cooperation with international partners as well as with count ries of origin, transit  and departure;    reduction of incentives for illegal migration through effective returns;    adequate  financial  and other  resources . 
Conclusions  – 19 October  2017       EUCO 14/17     2     EN    3. To consolidate and dee pen this approach on all migration routes , the European Council   further calls for the following:    showing  full commitment to our cooperation with Turkey on migration and to support  for the Western Balkans;    full and non -discriminatory implementation of the E U-Turkey Readmission Agreement  with all Member States;    ensuring significantly enhanced returns through actions at both EU and Member States  level, such as effective readmission agreements and arrangements;  the European Border  and Coast Guard Agency should be further strengthened and play an increased role in  organising returns;    ensuring that CSDP missions  and operations are fully staffed  and that their mandates are  adapted as required to assist in the fight against traffickers and smugglers networks and  to help disrupting their business model; supporting the a ction of our partners of the  G5 Sahel ;   applying voluntary resettlement  schemes  and developing  them together with  international partners , in particular the UNHCR;    enhancing i nformation  and data sharing w ithin the  EU, between Member States,  JHA agencies, and CSDP missions and operations, as well as with international  partn ers; in this context, the European Council calls for the operational joint  investigation teams to be extended to relevant countries;    creating and applying the necessary leverage, by using all relevant EU policies,  instruments and tools , including development, trade and visa,  to achieve measurable  results in terms of preventing illegal migration and returning irregular migrants . 
Conclusions  – 19 October  2017       EUCO 14/17     3     EN    4. As concern s the Central Mediterranean route, the European Council :   recognises the significant contribution made by Italy on the Central Mediterranean  route;    calls for continued efforts by the EU and support for Member States to stem the flows  and increase returns, as well as to build strong cooperation with countries of origin,  transit and departure;    reiterates the importance of working with the Libyan authorities and all neighbours of  Libya to enhance border management capacity  and underscores the urgency of  suppor ting the development of the local communities in Li bya along the migratory  routes;    encourages and calls to support, also financially, UNHCR and IOM efforts in Libya , the  Sahel  and the region, including to further facilitate voluntary returns  and resettleme nt  and to improve reception conditions  in cooperation with Libyan authorities  so as to  ensure the humane treatment of migrants ;   commits to ensuring sufficient and targeted funding, including through the North Africa  window of the EU Trust Fund for Africa, to underpin the necessary migration -related  actions in North Africa and finance all relevant projects in 2017 and beyond, with  timely disbursements. It tasks the Council, with the assistance of the Commission, to  undertake immediate operational follow -up to ensure delivery on this commitment  before the December European Council;    calls for increased efforts to rapidly establish a permanent EU presence in Libya, taking  account of the conditions on the ground . 
Conclusions  – 19 October  2017       EUCO 14/17     4     EN    5. The European Council calls for close monitoring o f the situation along the Eastern and  Western Mediterranean routes in light of recent increases in migration flows.   6. The European Council recalls  that addressing the root causes of migration and providing  economic and social opportunities in the countries o f transit and origin are part of its long term approach to migration . In this context, the European Council welcome s the recent launch  of the European Fund for Sustainable Development, which supports investment in African  and Neighbourhood countries.  It also welcomes the implementation of the Economic  Resilience Initiative of the E uropean Investment Bank (EIB) , mobili sing investments in the  Neighbourhood countries. It looks forward to discussing cooperation with African partners at  the upcoming African Unio n-European Union Summit.   7. The European Council reiterates its commitment to the Schengen system and expresses the  intention to g et "Back to Schengen" as soon as possible while taking proportionate security  interests of Member States fully into account .  8. The European  Council welcome s the progress achieved so far on the reform of the Common  European Asylum System and call s for further convergence towards  an agreement which  strikes the right balance between responsibility and solidarity and ensures resilience to  future  crises , in line with its June 2017 conclusions. The European Council will return  to this matter  at its meeting  in December, and will seek to reach a consensus  during  the first half of 2018 .  
Conclusions  – 19 October  2017       EUCO 14/17     5     EN    II. DIGITAL EUROPE   9. The Tallinn Digital Summit on 29  Septembe r 2017 sent a strong message on the need for  a  stronger and more coherent Digital  Europe. Prime Minister Ratas's conclusions after the  Summit provide an excellent basis for further work at all levels .  10. Digitalisation offers immense opportunities for innovat ion, growth and jobs, will contribute to  our global competitiveness, and enhance creative and cultural diversity. Seizing these  opportunities requires collectively  tackling  some of the challenges posed by the digital  transformation and reviewing policies affected by digitalisation. The European Council is  ready to do what it takes for Europe to go digital .  11. To successfully build a Digital Europe, the E U needs  in particular:    governments and public sectors that are fully brought into the digital age  and lead by  example : e-government  and the deployment of new technologies, accessibility, one -stop  government and the once -only principle , and a digitali sed public sector are key to  transforming our societies  and supporting the EU's four freedoms. The Europ ean  Council calls for implementing the Tallinn Ministerial Declaration on e -Government;  
Conclusions  – 19 October  2017       EUCO 14/17     6     EN     a future -oriented regulatory framework : completing the Digital Single Market Strategy  in all its elements by the end of 2018 remains an essential task. Despite conside rable  progress, work in this area needs to be accelerated in order to meet this deadline. To that  end, the  additional  TTE/Telecom Council on 24  October should discuss how to speed  up and prioritise the work  on the Digital Single Market. Agreement between t he co legislators on geo -blocking, audio -visual media services  and parcel delivery  should be  reached by the end of 2017. By June 2018, co -legislators should also agree on the free  flow of non -personal data proposal  and the electronic communications code. The  European  Council highlights the importance of ensuring adequate rules on data flows  with third countries in trade agreements, without prejudice to EU legislation.  Furthermore, negotiations on copyright and on the Digital Content Directive should be  pursued as a matter of priority. The European Council also underlines the necessity of  increased transparency in platforms’ practices and uses ;   a first rate infrastructure and communications network : this requires cooperation at the  EU level, inter alia with the aim of achieving world -class very high -speed  fixed and  mobile  networks (5G) all across the EU and increased coordinated availabilities of  spectrum by 2020 under consistent regulatory and economic conditions; this in turn  requires dedicating all necessa ry legislative resources, including a sufficient number of  trilogues, to reaching an agreement on the electronic communication s code, including  the necessary provisions on spectrum ;   a common approach to cybersecurity : the digital world requires trust, and trust can only  be achieved if we ensure more proactive security by design in all digital policies,  provide adequate security certification of products and services, and increase our  capacity to prevent, deter , detect  and respond to cyberattacks. To that end, the  Commission's cybersecurity  proposals should be developed in a holistic way, delivered  timely and examined without delay, on the basis of an action plan to be set up by the  Council;  
Conclusions  – 19 October  2017       EUCO 14/17     7     EN     combating terrorism and onl ine crime : efforts to this effect should be intensified  as set  out by the European Council in its June 2017 conclusions. The European Council  welcomes the Commission 's communication on Tackling Illegal Content Online and  reiterates its readiness  to support  appropriate  measures at EU level, if necessary ;   labour markets,  training  and education system s fit for the digital age : there  is a need to   invest in digital skills, to  empower and enable all Europeans;    a determined R&D and investment effort : to support ne w forms of entrepreneurship,  and stimulate and assist the digital transformation of industries  and services. EU  instruments such as the EU Framework Programmes, including Horizon 2020, the  European Structural and Investment Funds  and the European Fund for Strategic  Investments  can help achieve this objective. The EU should also explore ways to set up  the appropriate structures and funding to support breakthrough innovation ;   a sense of urgency to address emerging trends : this includes issues such as artifici al  intelligence and blockchain technologies, while at the same time ensuring a high level  of data protection, digital rights and ethical standards. The European Council invites the  Commission to put forward a European approach to artificial intelligence by  early 2018  and calls on the Commission  to put forward  the necessary  initiatives for strengthening   the framework conditions with a view to enable the EU to explore new markets through  risk-based radical innovations and to reaffirm the leading role o f its industry ;  
Conclusions  – 19 October  2017       EUCO 14/17     8     EN     an effective and fair taxation system fit for the digital era : it is important to ensure that  all companies pay their fair share of taxes and to ensure a global level -playing field  in  line with the work currently underway at the OECD. The Europ ean Council invites the  Council to pursue its examination of the Commission communication on this issue and  looks forward to appropriate Commission proposals by early 2018.   12. Our objective must be to create a more integrated Single Market and to deliver prac tical  benefits for European citizens and businesses. The European Council will closely follow  developments  in this area and provide the necessary guidance. It calls on the institutions to  step up the legislative work , and on the Member States to implement the relevant EU  legislation and to take all the measures required within  their sphere of competence so as to  shape the new digital era.  The European Council will at its level address issues that cannot be  solved at the level of the Council.   
Conclusions  – 19 October  2017       EUCO 14/17     9     EN    III. SECURITY AND DEFENCE   13. The European Council recalls its June 2017 conclusions. It welcomes the significant progress  made b y Member States in preparing a Permanent Structured Cooperation (PESCO)  notification  with a common list of commitments , and on PESCO governance . It encourages  those Member States in a position to do so to swiftly notify the Council and the High  Representative of their intention s to participate in PESCO. This would allow for the launching  of PESCO before the end of the year, with a view to swiftly  implementing the commitments,  including the launching of first projects . The European Council  welcomes the work done so  far by the co-legislators  on the Commission’s proposal for a European Defence  Industrial  Development Programme  (EDIDP) . It calls for an  agreement within the Council by the end of  the year, with a view to concluding negotiations with the European Parliament as soon as  possible so as to  have the first capability projects identified by the Member States financed  in 2019 .  14. The European Council  encourages Member States to develop flexible and sound  financing  mechanisms  within the European Defence Fund , to allow for  joint procurement of capabilities   and/or their  joint maintenance and as a way of improving access to  cutting -edge capabilities.   The objective is to deliver capabilities, ensure a competitive, innovative and balanced basis  for Europe’s defence industry across the EU, including by cross border cooperation and  participation of SMEs, and to contribute to greater European defence cooperatio n, by  exploiting synergies and mobilising EU support in addition to Member States’ financing.  European defence industrial development will also require EU support for SME and  intermediate (mid -cap) investments in the area of security and defence . It encour ages the EIB  to examine further steps with a view to supporting investments in defence research and  development activities. It welcomes the launch of the trial run of the Coordinated Annual  Review on Defence (CARD) which should contribute to spur enhanced defence cooperation  among Memb er States .  
Conclusions  – 19 October  2017       EUCO 14/17     10     EN    15. The European Council highlights the need for PESCO, the European Defence Fund and  CARD to be mutually reinforcing so as to enhance defence cooperation among  Member  States .  16. The European Council will revert to the issue in December 2017 and assess the progress  achieved with regard to all aspects of the external security and defence  agenda as set out in  December 2016 .  IV. EXTERNAL RELATIONS   17. The European Council held a debate on rel ations with Turkey .  18. The European Council calls on DPRK to fully and unconditionally comply without delay with  its obligations under UN Security Council Resolutions and to abandon its nuclear and ballistic  missile programs in a complete, verifiable and irre versible manner. The recent behaviour of  the DPRK is unacceptable and pose s a significant threat to the Korean peninsula and beyond.  The European Council  stresses that lasting peace and denuclearisation of the Korean  peninsula must be achieved through peac eful means, through credible and meaningful  dialogue. The EU sanctions' regime towards DPRK was further reinforced by the EU  autonomous sanctions adopted by the Foreign Affairs Council on 16 October 2017 . The  European Council will consider further response s in close consultation with partners and the  EU will continue to reach out to third countries urging the full implementation of  UN sanctions .  19. The European Council reaffirms its full commitment to the Iran nuclear deal and endorses the  statement by the For eign Affairs Council of 16 October 2017.    
