     11481/20    MMA/tb  1   JAI.A   EN         Council of the   European Union                 Brussels ,   21   October   2020   (OR.  en )       11481 / 20           FREMP 87   JAI 776                 NOTE   From:   Presidency   On:   21   October   2020   To:   Delegations   Subject:   Presidency conclusions     The Charter of Fundamental Rights in the   context of Artificial Intelligence  and Digital Change       At its meeting on 14 July 2020 , the FREMP Working Party had a first exchange of views  on the  scope of this year’s Council conclusions on the Charter of Fundamental Right s. On the basis of the  input received  at th e meeting and subsequent written comments , the Presidency prepared draft  Council  conclusions on the Charter of Fundamental Rights in the context of Artificial Intelligence  and Digital Change . At two  informal video conferenc e meetings of the FREMP Working Party on  2 September  and 15 September, experts discussed the text of the draft Council conclusions .    Following discussions in the FREMP Working Party, the Presidency submitted the text of the draft  Council conclusions to Cor eper on 5 October and  7 October . At those meetings, consensus could  not be reached on the draft Council conclusions as set out in the Annex to document 1 1373 /19. At  the informal video conference of the Ministers of Justice on 9 October 2020 the Presidency  informed Ministers on the advanced state of negotiations and announced further work  by the  Presidency.  
     11481/20    MMA/tb  2   JAI.A   EN    However, o ne Member Sate continue d to object to the us e of the term ‘gender equality’  as neither  the Treaties nor the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights use the term ‘gender’ . Other Member States   were opposed to  the delet ion of  this term , in particular because it is commonly used in more recent  Union documents, suc h as the Council conclusions on shaping Europe’s digital future1 and in  ‘Council Conclusions on EU priorities for cooperation with the Council of Europe 2020 -2022’2,  adopted on 13 July 2020.     Thus, at Coreper on 21 October 2020, the Presidency confirmed that further efforts to reach a  consensus  on this particular point in the draft Council conclusions on the Charter of Fundam ental  Rights in the context of artificial intelligence and digital c hange  had not been successful . However,  the Presidency  stressed that the core elements of the conclusions, anchoring the Union’s  fundamental rights and values in the age of digitalisation, fostering the EU’s digital sovereignty and  actively participating  in the global debate on the use of artificial intellige nce with a view to shap ing  the international framework, were shared by all delegations. The Presidency concluded that  26 delegations supported, or did not object to, the text in its entirety as annexed to this documen t.                                                          1 OJ C 202 I, 16.6.20, paragraph  20.  2 9283/20, paragraph 12.  
     11481/20    MMA/tb  3  ANNEX  JAI.A   EN    ANNEX     CONCLUSIONS ON THE CHARTER OF FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS   IN THE CONTEXT OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE AND DIGITAL CHANGE     The COVID -19 pandemic has shown more clearly than ever that Europe must achieve digital  sovereignty in order to be able to act  with self -determination in the digital sphere and to foster the  resilience of the European Union . We therefore want to work together on European responses for  digital technologies, such as artificial intelligence (AI). We want to ensure that the design ,  development , deployment  and use of new technologies uphold and promote our common  values  and  the fun damental rights guaranteed by the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights (hereinafter ‘the  Charter’), while increasing our competitiveness and prosperity. High levels of IT security must be  maintained within a framework that is open to innovation.   We are commit ted to the responsible and human -centric design,  development, deployment, use and  evaluation of AI. We should harness the potential of this key technology in promoting economic  recovery in all sectors in a spirit of European solidarity,  uphold and promote fundamental rights,  democracy and the rule of law  and maintain high legal and  ethical standards.     I. Introduction     1. The EU is a ‘union of values’, as enshrined in Article 2 of the Treaty on European Union,  founded on respect for human dignity, freedom, democracy, equality, the rule of law and  respect for human rights, including the rights of persons belonging to minorit ies. All  Member States have a responsibility to uphold these values in order to make them a reality  in the daily life of  all their citizens. We recall  in this respect the legally binding nature of the  Charter for the EU and for the Member States when they are implementing Union law.  
     11481/20    MMA/tb  4  ANNEX  JAI.A   EN      2. Ongoing challenges and developments over the past year have  once again highlighted the  fact that the protection of fundamental rights is a continuous endeavour. In particular, issues  such as  racism, domestic  violence, violenc e against children and difficulties in protecting  vulnerable groups , the rise in disinformation and the risk of violations of the rule of law and  democracy persist. The COVID -19 pandemic has exacerbated many of these challenges and  introduced new ones, in particular balancing access to health care with other fundamental  rights. Again st this background, we take  note of the relevant surveys and reports of the F RA,  in particular the FRA Fundamental Rights Survey.  We reaffir m our  commitment to the  prohibition of any unlawful discrimination based on any ground as enshrined in Article 21  of the Charter.  We also reaffirm our  commitment  to the  accession of the EU to  the European  Convention on Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms  as enshrined in Article 6(2) of the  Treaty on European Union. Moreover, the EU will cooperate with the Council of Europe in  the promotion of gender equality and women’s rights and on combatin g violence against  women and domestic violence: the Council of Europe ’s ‘Istanbul Convention’ has been  ratified and is being implemented by 21 EU Member States .     3. The COVID -19 pandemic has also demonstrated the value of digital technologies, including  AI, in improving healthcare, reaching citizens and keeping the economy running. In this  context it is important to safeguard proper connect ivity and inclusion. We reaffirm our   commitment to jointly overcome this crisis, to bring the added value of future -orien ted  technologies and applications to all members of society and to jointly uphold and promote  our common principles and values as enshrined in Article 2 of the Treaty on European  Union.   
     11481/20    MMA/tb  5  ANNEX  JAI.A   EN      4. Digital technologies, including AI,  are essential for European digital sovereignty, security,  innovations and economic development and can contribute significantly to the protection  and promotion of fundamental rights and democracy and the rule of law. To be digitally  sovereign, the EU must  build a truly digital single market,  reinforce its ability to define its  own rules, to make autonomous technological choices, and to develop and deploy strategic  digital capacities and infrastructure. The digital transition is the EU’s most important  enab ler of sustainable growth and competitiveness. The EU must make full use of and  develop its strengths in the digital economy and climate -neutral technologies. Digital  technologies have an increasing and largely positive effect on the daily lives of Europea ns,  for example in industry, services, research, justice and publ ic security. We therefore  welcome  the European Commission’s efforts to establish an AI ecosystem of excellence and  trust based on our common  principles and values, bringing the benefits of th is technology to  all European societies and economies.     5. However, while digital technologies, including AI, present increasing opportunities and  benefits, their design, development, deployment, and misuse may also entail risks to  fundamental rights, democra cy and the rule of law. Therefore, efforts are necessary to  ensure that the respect for fundamental rights as enshrined in the Charter remains  guaranteed. In this context, challenges such as opacity, complexity, bias, a certain degree of  unpredictability a nd partially autonomous behaviour need to be addressed in order to ensure  the compatibility of automated systems with fundamental rights and to facilitate the  enforcement of legal rules.  
     11481/20    MMA/tb  6  ANNEX  JAI.A   EN      6. To address potential risks effectively, specific requirements must be met for the design,  development, deployment and use of AI systems.  In this regard, developing common  technical standards could contribute to addressing these challenges and help to foster  trust  and confidence  in the technology. We welcome  the approach proposed by the European  Commission in its White Paper ‘On Artificial Intelligence - A European approach to  excellence and trust’, of reviewing existing EU legislation to determine whether it  adequately addresses the risks and opportunities, as well as the requirements of AI  applications, whether it can be effectively enforced and whether any adjustments or new  legislation are necessary, also with regard to the protection of our common principles and  values.     7. The European Union and its Member States must seize the opportunities of digital change,  while also addressing potential risks and benefits. The protection and promotion of  fundamental rights is key to ensuring that the EU is a place where people can prosper, enjoy  their rights and freedom s and live wit hout discrimination. We emphasise  that the European  approach to digital transformation and in particular AI should be human -centric and ensure  the full respect and promotion of fundamental rights. In the co ntext of the public sector, we  ackno wledge  the ongoing work on the draft text of a  joint Member State declaration to be   concluded at the ministerial meeting on value -based digitalisation in December 2020 . 
     11481/20    MMA/tb  7  ANNEX  JAI.A   EN      8. The EU and its Member States must foster their digital sovereignty, while remaining o pen to  all companies complying with European rules and standards. They must actively participate  in the global debate on the use of AI with a view to continuing to shape the international  framework, the processes and discussions in this field in accordance  with our common  principles and values, and ensure effective application and implementation of existing  norm s. In this context, we acknowledge  the proposed EU Action Plan for Human Rights and  Democracy 2020 -2024, which sets the promotion of human rights and democracy in the use  of digital technologies, including AI, as a priority in all areas of EU external action.     9. We acknowledge and stress  the importance of  coherence with the valuable work and  initiatives carried out on fundamental and human rights in the context of digitalisation by the  European institutions and agencies, in particular the European Commission, the European  Parliament, the EU Agency for Fundamental Rights , and in the relevant case -law of the  European Court of Justice , as well as in other fora, in particular the Council of Europe and  its Ad Hoc Committee on AI, the OSCE, the OECD and the United Nations.     II. A fundamental rights -based approach to AI     10. We underscore  that the design, development, deployment and use of AI must fully respect  fundamental rights and existing legal rules. The same degree of protection should be applied  in the digital and in  the physical world. We emphasise  that, under Article 52(1) of the  Charter, any limitation on the exercise of the rights and freedoms laid down by the Charter  may only be made if it is necessary and genuinely satisfies an objective of general interest  recognised by the EU or the need to protect the rights and freedoms of others, subject to the  principle of proportionality, and must be provided for by law and respect the essence of the  fundamental rights and freedoms.   
     11481/20    MMA/tb  8  ANNEX  JAI.A   EN      11. The relevant legislation giving an e ffect to fundamental rights may be challenged by the  complexity and opacity of certain AI applications, which would require specialised expertise  and processes to comprehend and control the outcomes of such applications. Human  oversight and transparency ar e an essential element in ensuring that AI systems are in  conformity with the r elevant legislation. We support  the European Commission’s proposal  to develop proportionate and evidence -based requirements for the human oversight and  transparency of AI system s, e.g. requirements on documentation, testing and accountability  that benefit the effective enforcement of existing laws.     12. We call  on the EU and its Member States to assess whether existing EU and national legal  rules are adequate to take advantage of th e opportunities and address potential risks that the  use of digital technologies and AI systems in particular may create and to develop them  further where necessary. Adequate capacities of supervisory authorities should be ensured to  fulfil their mandates where AI applications are used and their cooperation at European level  should be enhanced.     13. We highlight  the importance of creating awareness about the use of digital technologies and  embedded AI capabilities in government institutions, the judiciary, law enforcement, the  economy and science, civil society, education and the general public. Digital transformation  requires people to develop their competencies and skills in order to engage positively with  AI technologies, including through information about e xisting rights and effective legal  remedies. The needs of marginalised individuals and groups and those in vulnerable  situations such as persons with  a disability, children and the elderly may requir e special  attention. We therefore welcome  initiatives to raise citizens’ awareness of AI and to increase  people’s ‘AI literacy’, including through research, training and education.  
     11481/20    MMA/tb  9  ANNEX  JAI.A   EN      a. AI and Dignity     14. Fundamental rights are universal, indivisible, interdependent and interrelated. Protecting and  promoting fundamental rights and the underlying idea of human dignity lies at the heart of a  human -centric approach to AI.     b. AI and Freedoms     15. We welcom e the fact that digital technologies, including AI, can enhance the protection and  promotion of fundamental rights and democracy, for example by making public  participation easier and more effective, by increasing access to public services, by  facilitating the documentation of violations and abuses of fundamental rights, or by using AI  analys is to detect and counter hybrid threats.     16. Where necessary and appropriate, the use of AI could facilitate the results of the work of  law enforcement authorities, and co uld thereby contribute to improving people’s safety and  security in the EU. Areas of particular interest for AI development include data analysis, the  understanding of new and previously unknown patterns and links, and the search for reliable  evidence in c riminal cases. Data protection rules and other legal and ethical norms need to  be ensured and appropriate safeguards  have to be in place.     17. At the same time, businesses and governments are increasingly using personal data and AI  to try to understand and pre dict group behaviour and target individuals that are categorised  as being part of that group. Appropriate safeguards need to be in place to ensure that these  applications are in conformity with data protection and privacy laws, in particular the  General Da ta Protection Regulation (Regulation (EU) 2016/679) and national data  protection laws, as well as other fundamental rights.    
     11481/20    MMA/tb  10  ANNEX  JAI.A   EN    18. We recognise  the respective risks and underline  the need for safeguards, especially with  regard to the use of mass surveillance technology and facial recognition systems and the  effects they may have on the exercise of democratic participation, the right to freedom of  expression and the right to freedo m of assemb ly and association. We note  the ongoing  discussion on whether such systems should be used in principle and  on possible bans on  their use. To the extent that these sys tems are to be used, we recognise  that clear legal  requirements need to be form ulated beforehand. In particular, the use of AI must respect  fundamental rights and freedoms, must be in conformity with data protection and privacy  laws and effective legal remedies must be guaranteed .     19. The use of AI is particularly sensitive when online  platforms and search engines aggregate,  select and prioritise content, as the possibilit y to freely access information and pluralism in  terms of sources of information and diversity can be at stake. A free society needs access to  diverse information, a fr ee discourse and the exchange of different perspectives.     20. It is necessary to fight illegal content online, including hate crime, but at the same time to  protect the right of freedom of expression and the right of information. There is a need to  discuss in  which circumstances and to what extent the results delivered by AI systems to  delete specific content should require meaningful human intervention. In sensitive areas,  service providers should make their AI systems transparent, for example by granting  research access to them.    
     11481/20    MMA/tb  11  ANNEX  JAI.A   EN    c. AI and Equality     21. AI-based applications present opportunities for assessing fundamental rights compliance,  including in the field of equality. Decisions based on algorithmic systems of predefined  rules and accurate and adequate data that is fit  for purpose could be less prone to biased  results than human -made decisions. At the same time, the use of AI may in certain cases  also perpetuate and amplify discrimination, including structural inequalities. Equality is of  particular con cern i n this regard. We take  note of the opinion on ‘AI – opportunities and  challenges for gender equality’ adopted by the Advisory Committee on Equal Opportunities  for Women and Men. Safeguards are also needed regarding linguistic diversity and the  accessibilit y of services to citizens in the official languages of the EU.     22. Data used to train AI systems therefore have to be accurate and adequate for their purpose  and potential biases have to be addressed while allowing for sufficient flexibility in  Research and Development for the further development of these systems. In this  respect, we  underline  the importance of the principles of equality and non -discrimination in the design,  development, deployment, use and evaluation of AI, particularly in systems integrating  machine learning, and of ensuring that such systems are subject to adequate safeguard s and  oversight, including market surveillance.  
     11481/20    MMA/tb  12  ANNEX  JAI.A   EN      d. AI and Solidarity     23. Digital technologies can enhance the protection of social rights, for example by facilitating  access to social security  and social systems. We underline  that while digital algorithms,  including AI -based ones, may allow the development of better -targeted individual assistance  and treatments, the application of such technologies should benefit the whole social  community, promote the adequate social protection and healthcare of groups in vul nerable  situations and should not be used to weaken the principle of solidarity. Also, while these  technologies may enhance the market surveillance of product safety on the EU market, they  may also pose new challenges to consumer protection rights in the p roduct safety area.      24. AI has great potential for improving the level of human health protection, especially through  personalised diagnosis and medici ne. In this context, we emphasise  the need for suitable,  high-quality data sets to train artificial inte lligence algorithms. We underline  that AI used in  the social and health sectors needs to be applied with particular respect for the dignity of  human being s, protection of patients’ privacy and their physical and mental integrity, and in  compliance with all re levant legal provisions regarding protection of personal data,  including mechanisms to ensure the confidentiality and safety of such data.       e. AI and Citizens’ Rights     25. We recognise  the potential of digital technologies, including AI applications, to improve the  protection of the right to good administration, the right of access to documents as well as the  right to petition s. 
     11481/20    MMA/tb  13  ANNEX  JAI.A   EN      26. Direct, universal suffrage  and free elections by secret  ballot  are the basis of the democratic  process and a core element of our common values. They need to be preserved in the digital  era. Cyber attacks and disinformation  targeting electoral processes, campaigns and  candidates have the potential to polarise pu blic discourse and undermine the secrecy of the  ballot, the integrity and fairness of the electoral process and citizens’ trust in elected  representativ es. In this context, we stress  the importance of safeguards and active measures  to counter  disinformatio n campaigns, the abuse of private data, hybrid threats and  cyberattacks.       f. AI and Justice     27. Access to justice, transparency and expl icability of judicial processes and decision -making,  an independent judiciary and legal certainty are essential to the proper functioning of the  justice system in accordance with the rule of law. Digital technologies, including AI, can  contribute to improving access to legal information, possibly reducing the duration of  judicial proceedings and to enhancing access to just ice in general. However, these  developments can also have adverse effects, for example through the use of biased  algorithms. Effective legal remedies must be guaranteed to ensure the right to a fair trial, the  presumption of innocence and the right of defe nce. Moreover, non -digital access to law and  justice will remain essential. We remain  committed to upholding and promoting the rule of  law in the Union an d its Member States. In this re gard, we refer  to the Council  Conclusions  of 9 October 2020  on ‘Access to justice – seizing the opportunities of digitalisation’.    
     11481/20    MMA/tb  14  ANNEX  JAI.A   EN      III. The way forward     28. In order to ensure that the rights, freedoms and principles as enshrined in the Charter are  effectively protected throughout the design, development, deployment a nd evaluation o f AI,  we call  on the Union and its Member States to follow the gui dance provided in these  conclusions and invite  them to consider effective measures for identifying, predicting and  responding to the potential impacts of digital technologies, including AI, on fundamental  rights. Legal and regulatory framew orks, such as the European Commission’s announced  proposal for  a future regulatory framework for AI, should strengthen trust, strike a fair   balance between the various interests and leave room for research and development and  further innovation and technical and socio -technical developments. They should foster an  environment in which all actors respect and promote fundamental rights.     29. We invite  the Union and its Member States to involve various stakeholders in the  discussions around these issues and in the potential development of legal and regulatory  frameworks so a s to include broad expertise and different perspectives, including from civil  society.     30. We welcome  the extensive analysis provided by the Fundamental Rights Agency on AI and  fundamental rights and encourage the Agency to continue its research on the protec tion of  our fundamental rights and common values in the age of digitalisation.    
