1     BERLIN, 20 January 2021    Human Rights in the Era of AI -  Europe as international Standard Setter for Artific ial Intelligence     Conference Conclusions      The Council of Europe is Europe’s core organisation  for the  protection and promotion of human rights, democracy  and the  rule of law.     It is the only institution that focuses simultaneou sly on all  these three pillars and is uniquely well placed to establish  binding standards through its intergovernmental str ucture.    It has risen early and decisively to the challenges  posed by  new technologies.  Convention 108 on Data Protection and the Budapest  Convention on Cybercrime became global benchmarks. The  European Court of Human Rights has repeatedly held that the  European Convention on Human Rights applies both on line  and offline.   The Council of Europe is now addressing one of the most  pressing questions for the future of our societies:  How to  ensure that Artificial Intelligence (“AI”) will saf eguard, rather  than threaten, human rights, democracy and the rule  of law.  The development of Artificial Intelligence is both an  opportunity and a challenge and is set to impact al most all  human activities. 
2   On behalf of the German Presidency of the Committee  of  Ministers of the Council of Europe, the German Fede ral  Foreign Office and the Federal Ministry of Justice and  Consumer Protection are proud to have hosted a virt ual highlevel Conference on this issue on 20 January 2021, with the  support of the Council of Europe.  High-level personalities and experts from the EU,  governments from around the world, academia, the pr ivate  sector and civil society, including representatives  from the Ad  hoc Committee on Artificial Intelligence (CAHAI) of  the  Council of Europe addressed the question of the fea sibility and  potential elements of an international harmonised l egal  framework on AI.   In particular, the Conference addressed the impact of Artificial  Intelligence on Human Rights, Democracy and the Rul e of  Law. It also elicited international perspectives on  AI  regulation, both with regard to the work being done  within the  Council of Europe and beyond. Moreover, it addresse d the  need for co-operation between international standar d setters  for the regulation of AI, in particular between the  Council of  Europe and the European Union.    In view of the discussions that took place during t his  conference, the German Presidency of the Committee of  Ministers :  1.  Concludes that Artificial Intelligence represents a  major  opportunity for each individual and for the harmoni ous  development of our societies, as encouraged in part icular by  the Sustainable Development Goals of the United Nat ions.   
3   2.  Recognises that the increased reliance on Artificia l  Intelligence entails substantial risks, in particul ar in relation to  human rights, democracy and the rule of law – the c ore  elements upon which our European societies are buil t.    3.  Recognises that discrimination, the advent of a  surveillance society, the weakening of human autono my,  information distortion, electoral interference and digital  exclusion are concrete concerns that are being expr essed in  relation to Artificial Intelligence.    4.  Notes that CAHAI’s feasibility study, as well as re cent  reports of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Counci l of  Europe and the Recommendations of the Commissioner for  Human Rights, shed light on many such consequences for  individuals and for society as a whole.    5.  Notes that CAHAI’s feasibility study identified exi sting  gaps in the currently applicable legal framework wi th regard  to the  challenges raised by the design, development and us e of  Artificial Intelligence.    6.  Notes that, consequently, appropriate international   regulation of Artificial Intelligence, based on, bu t also  complementing, existing legal standards is essentia l to ensure  that the design, development and use of Artificial Intelligence  will be in accordance with and will strengthen huma n rights,  democracy and the rule of law.      7.  Strongly supports the development of a binding  horizontal legal framework, laying the basic founda tions for  any application of Artificial Intelligence and, at the same time,  the development of sector-specific legal instrument s of a 
4   binding or non-binding nature, depending on the inh erent risks  to human rights, democracy and the rule of law.    8.  Recognises that specific requirements for Artificia l  Intelligence that ensure transparency, the quality of training  data, human autonomy, sufficient complaint options and  remedies, as well as guaranteeing effective enforce ment  mechanisms, among other things, are of utmost impor tance  when developing elements of a future legal framewor k for  Artificial Intelligence.    9.  Notes that AI applications that promote, strengthen  and  augment the protection of human rights, democracy a nd the  rule of law should be fostered.     10.  Recommends that, if a context-specific risk assessm ent  finds that an AI application can pose significant o r unknown  risks to human rights, democracy or the rule of law , and if no  appropriate mitigation measures exist within curren t legal  frameworks, a ban or moratorium be considered as a last  resort.    11.  Encourages the CAHAI to continue its work also thro ugh  multi-stakeholder consultations.    12.  Encourages all bodies of the Council of Europe to  continue their work on Artificial Intelligence, in coordination  with CAHAI.     13.  Calls on all international organisations, including  the  European Union, to co-operate with the Council of E urope in  their work on Artificial Intelligence.   
5   14.  Will take into account the discussions that took pl ace  during this conference when organising the Council of  Europe’s 131 st  Ministerial Meeting, to be held in May 2021,  which should enable member States to send a strong signal of  support and encouragement to the ongoing work in th e  Council of Europe and in particular in the CAHAI. 
