







Responsible AI | IBM






















































































Home





Trust




Responsible AI





                                    



  
    Responsible AI






    


                                






IBM is helping to advance responsible AI with a multidisciplinary, multidimensional approach










Learn about integrated AI governance at IBM





Learn about the ethics of AI agents
















































Mastering AI governance: How to leverage technology to simplify compliance.

Discover how to embed AI governance and streamline compliance in IBM’s expert-led webinar.



Register now















				

     
    Now is the moment for responsible AI




    


			



Businesses are facing an increasingly complex, ever-changing global regulatory landscape when it comes to AI. The IBM approach to responsible AI balances innovation with responsibility, helping you adopt trusted AI at scale.
















                Point of view
            

                Foundation models: Opportunities, risks and mitigations.
            

Read the paper











                Fostering a more ethical future by leveraging technology
                
            







                Case study: Fostering greater transparency across the data ecosystem
                
            
















                                



  
    Latest updates






    


                            

























                Transforming change management with responsible AI
            
Prioritizing trust, transparency, skills and agility can help organizations lead the way through AI transformation. 

Learn about the framework 






















                Responsibly scaling AI agents across the enterprise
            
Understanding the unique opportunities, risks and mitigations of AI agents is a critical first step toward scaling them responsibly.

Get the insights






















                Accelerating innovation through centralized AI governance
            
The IBM Office of Privacy and Responsible Technology is scaling responsible AI and unlocking business value through integrated AI governance.

Find out how






















                What are the costs of not implementing AI governance?
            
Just as important as what AI governance helps organizations achieve is what it helps organizations avoid. Find out the extensive potential costs of not implementing an AI governance program.

Read the blog






















                5 ways responsible AI has changed in the last 5 years
            
Through the last five years of AI evolution, the IBM AI Ethics Board has helped IBM responsibly innovate by guiding the development and implementation of ethical guidelines for AI.

Find out how






















                Celebrating the 5th anniversary of the IBM AI Ethics Board
            
Members of the IBM AI Ethics Board reflect on their experiences helping to ensure that AI is used responsibly and for the benefit of all of society.

Get the insights






















                Gaining operational efficiency through data transparency
            
The Data & Trust Alliance Data Provenance Standards are helping IBM accelerate internal data diligence processes.

Find out how






















                Three key considerations for effective AI governance
            
AI governance matters now more than ever. But how do you get started? Find out in a new guide from the IBM Institute for Business Value.

Get the guide

















        
        

     
    Our principles and pillars




    


    


            
            


  
  
      The Principles for Trust and Transparency are the guiding values that distinguish the IBM approach to responsible AI.
  




    


            
        




Read the Principles for Trust and Transparency











        



  
    The purpose of AI is to augment human intelligence






    


    



IBM believes AI should make all of us better at our jobs, and that the benefits of the AI era should touch the many, not just the elite few.








        



  
    Data and insights belong to their creator






    


    



IBM clients’ data is their data, and their insights are their insights. We believe that government data policies should be fair and equitable and prioritize openness.






        



  
    Technology must be transparent and explainable






    


    



Companies must be clear about who trains their AI systems, what data was used in training and, most importantly, what went into the recommendations of their algorithms.












            
            


  
  
      The Principles are supported by the Pillars of Trust, our foundational properties for responsible AI.

 
  




    


            
        



























































        



  
    Explainability






    


    



Good design does not sacrifice transparency in creating a seamless experience.





























































        



  
    Fairness






    


    



Properly calibrated, AI can assist humans in making choices more fairly.





























































        



  
    Robustness






    


    



As systems are employed to make crucial decisions, AI must be secure and robust.






























































        



  
    Transparency






    


    



Transparency reinforces trust, and the best way to promote transparency is through disclosure.






























































        



  
    Privacy






    


    



AI systems must prioritize and safeguard consumers’ privacy and data rights.





























Point of view
Foundation models: Opportunities, risks and mitigations


                      Read the paper
                      
                 











                AI governance
            


                The enterprise guide to generative AI
            

                Find out strategies for capturing business value with generative AI while also building governance guardrails that build trust.
            

Get the guide 






                AI governance
            


                The urgency of AI governance
            

                IBM and the Data & Trust Alliance
offer insights about the need for
governance, particularly in the era of
generative AI.
            

Read the perspective






                White paper
            


                A policymaker’s guide to foundation models
            

                A risk- and context-based approach to AI regulation can mitigate potential risks, including those posed by foundation models.
            

Read the white paper
















            
                
                    

     
    Putting principles into action




    


                
                
            
        



The IBM AI Ethics Board is at the center of IBM’s commitment to trust. Its mission is to:
Provide governance and decision-making as IBM develops, deploys, and uses AI and other technologiesMaintain consistency with the company’s valuesAdvance trustworthy AI for our clients, our partners and the world
The Board sponsors workstreams that deliver thought leadership, policy advocacy and education and training about responsible AI to drive responsible innovation and the advancement and improvement of AI and emerging technologies. It also assesses use cases that raise potential ethical concerns.
The Board is a critical mechanism by which IBM holds our company and all IBMers accountable to our values and commitments to the ethical development and deployment of technology.
Reflecting on the five-year anniversary of the IBM AI Ethics BoardLearn more about ethical impact in the 2023 IBM Impact Report
























        



  
    watsonx.governance






    


    



Accelerate responsible, transparent and explainable data and AI workflows.

 
   





            Learn more
            
            
        


            Get the AI governance ebook
            
            
        














                                



  
    Partnerships and collaborations






    


                            
























                Helping researchers and developers make better AI design decisions
            
IBM and the University of Notre Dame have published BenchmarkCards, a collection of datasets, benchmarks and mitigations that helps guides the development of safe and transparent AI systems.

Learn more






















                Exploring the future of responsible AI in finance
            
At the Notre Dame-IBM Tech Ethics Lab, industry leaders gathered to discuss the opportunities and challenges of responsible AI in finance.

Get the insights






















                Fostering greater transparency across the data ecosystem
            
Co-created by IBM, the Data & Trust Alliance's new Data Provenance Standards offer a first-of-their-kind metadata taxonomy to support transparency about data provenance.

Learn about the standards






















                Proactively generating value with responsible AI
            
Experts from IBM and University of Notre Dame outline recommendations for getting the best ROI from responsible AI investments.

Get the insights






















                 Partnership on AI shares risk mitigation strategies for the open foundation model value chain
            
With input from IBM, Partnership on AI's new report explores safeguards for open foundation models.

Read the report






















                The Data & Trust Alliance offers new policy roadmap for AI governance
            
Co-authored by IBM, the Data & Trust Alliance's new policy roadmap provides recommendations for balancing AI innovation with AI safety. 

Read the recommendations






















                Pulitzer Center launches program to train 1,000 journalists on AI reporting
            
With support from the Notre Dame-IBM Technology Ethics Lab, the Pulitzer Center launches the AI Spotlight Series, a global training initiative.

Learn more






















                IBM and Meta launch the AI Alliance
            
IBM and Meta launch the AI Alliance in collaboration with over 50 founding members and collaborators globally.

Learn more






















                AI Governance Alliance releases Briefing Paper Series
            
In collaboration with IBM, the World Economic Forum offers three briefing papers to help guide responsible transformation with AI.

Read more






















Next steps




Find out how IBM can help you accelerate your responsible AI journey.






Explore our AI governance services




Discover watsonx.governance




































































