







IBM Policy | IBM






















































































                        



  
    IBM Policy






    


                    






    Driving growth, trust and innovation in the global economy
    
    
    
    









































Addressing challenges, while spurring growth and innovation 



IBM works collaboratively with policymakers and regulators on a range of public policy issues to not only advance innovation but also address emerging societal challenges. With dedicated resources in the Americas, Europe, Africa and Asia, IBM’s Government and Regulatory Affairs team is driven by the mutual objectives of global consistency and local relevancy. 








                    
                        
                            

     
    Featured videos




    


                        
                        
                    
                




                Join us as we sit down with Chris Fechner, CEO of Australia's Digital Transformation Agency, to talk about Australia’s digital economy. Discover how the government can leverage digital transformation to provide quality services and optimize processes to create a more positive experience for its citizens.
            








                Hear Rafaelita Aldaba, the Philippines Undersecretary for the Competitiveness and Innovation Group, discuss how generative AI is being leveraged for inclusive economic growth and regulatory frameworks in the Philippines. Learn how IBM supports governments with development and deployment of AI.
            







                Explore Singapore’s recent AI regulatory developments. In early 2024, Singapore announced a proposed framework for generative AI, followed by the release of an ASEAN guide on AI governance and ethics. Join IBM’s Anup Kumar as he sits down with Denise Wong of Singapore’s Infocomm Media Development Authority to discuss these developments in the country. 
            







                Explore the future of tech policy in the EU in this 2022 discussion, held during the Czech Republic’s EU Presidency. In the conversation, the IBM Policy Lab sat down with Czech Deputy Minister of Industry and Trade Petr Očko to discuss where tech policy in the EU stands and where it’s going. They also talk about the need for greater alignment between the US and EU on digital policy through institutions like such as the Trade and Technology Council.
            







                Join IBM’s Ryan Hagemann and Bradley Tusk of Tusk Ventures as they explore how emerging technologies such as crypto and blockchain can add value to economies and society.
            







                Watch IBM’s Christina Montgomery and Rebecca Finlay, CEO, Partnership on AI discuss the benefits to an open approach to AI innovation.
            

















            
                
                    

     
    Related articles




    


                
                
            
        


View all articles
                
            


























                10 September 2024
            

                IBM statement on House markup of AI bills
            
























                9 September 2024
            

                IBM unveils new Digital Policy Agenda for EU policymakers
            























                Navigating the  AI Revolution:  Why India Needs Strong  AI Governance
            























                Advancing a Trusted Framework for AI Innovation in Indonesia
            























                30 May 2024
            

                The EU AI Act Is About to Hit the Books: Compliance Steps You Need to Know
            
Categories: Artificial intelligence, Europe, Policy positions
























Next steps




Explore the IBM Policy blog to stay informed on the world's most pressing tech policy topics, from AI to quantum and more.
 






Explore the IBM Policy blog










































































