     
         Responsible AI Principles and Approach | Microsoft AI                                                  This is the Trace Id: db9755cc5a0fae5c7da89e33a2cc26c9              
























Skip to main content







Microsoft



Microsoft AI




Microsoft AI




                            Microsoft AI
                        




 Home 



Products and solutions


For personal use
For personal use


Microsoft Copilot


Download the Copilot app




For organizations
For organizations


Microsoft 365 Copilot


Download Microsoft 365 Copilot app


Copilot for organizations




Customize your Copilot
Customize your Copilot


Copilot Studio




Build your own
Build your own


Azure AI Foundry


Azure AI services


Azure AI solutions




Intelligent PCs
Intelligent PCs


Copilot+ PCs





 
AI for business leaders



AI use cases


Use cases


Customer stories



 

Responsible AI


Overview


Principles and approach


Tools and practices



 

Learn more


AI in blogs


AI 101


AI learning hub






More







 



 All Microsoft


Global


Microsoft Security


Azure


Dynamics 365


Microsoft 365


Microsoft Teams


Windows 365




Tech & innovation
Tech & innovation


Microsoft Cloud


AI


Azure Space


Mixed reality


Microsoft HoloLens


Microsoft Viva


Quantum computing


Sustainability




Industries
Industries


Education


Automotive


Financial services


Government


Healthcare


Manufacturing


Retail


All industries




Partners
Partners


Find a partner


Become a partner


Partner Network


Azure Marketplace


AppSource




Resources
Resources


Blog


Microsoft Advertising


Developer Center


Documentation


Events


Licensing


Microsoft Learn


Microsoft Research




View Sitemap














                          Microsoft Responsible AI     Principles and approach     We're committed to developing AI systems in a way that is transparent, reliable, and worthy of trust.                               Responsible AI Standard                            Responsible AI Standard                    AI principles                    Implementing responsible AI                    Transparency report                    Transparency documents                    FAQ                                                                           The Microsoft Responsible AI Standard        Explore guidance from Microsoft on how to design, build, and test AI systems.        Get the Standard     Reference guide                         Principles     Defining what’s important     We've identified six principles that we believe should guide AI development and use.                           Fairness      AI systems should treat all people fairly.  How might an AI system allocate opportunities, resources, and information in ways that are fair to the humans who use it?       See fairness in action                       Reliability and safety      AI systems should perform reliably and safely.  How might a system function well for people across different use conditions and contexts, including ones that it wasn’t originally intended for?       See reliability and safety in action                       Privacy and security      AI systems should be secure and respect privacy.  How might a system be designed to support privacy and security?       See privacy and security in action                       Inclusiveness      AI systems should empower everyone and engage all people, regardless of their backgrounds.   How might a system be designed to be inclusive for people of all abilities?        See inclusiveness in action                       Transparency      AI systems should be understandable.  How can we ensure that people correctly understand the capabilities of a system?       See transparency in action                       Accountability      People should be accountable for AI systems.   How can we create oversight so that humans can be accountable and in control?        See accountability in action                            Fairness                   Previous Slide                                                                                                 Next Slide            News     Measurement is the key to helping keep AI on track      Read more                    Research     Maximizing benefits and minimizing harms with language technologies      Read more                    Research     How AI teams adapt fairness checklists to real-world work        Read more                    Research     Fairness, accountability, transparency, and ethics in AI      Read more                    Blog     Microsoft’s responsible AI principles for accessible technology      Read more                    Tool     Fairlearn Python package on GitHub      Read more                    Podcast     Measuring and mitigating potential AI harms      Read more                 Back to Responsible AI in action - Fairness tab section                         Reliability and safety                  Previous Slide                                                                                                                                                     Next Slide            News     Why AI sometimes gets it wrong—and big strides to address it      Read more                    Blog     Evaluating and understanding progress in AI      Read more                    Blog     Reimagining the foundation of agentic AI for scale, extensibility, and robustness      Read more                    Blog     Microsoft AI safety policies updated for the UK AI Safety Summit      Read more                    Blog     Microsoft joins nonprofits to enact child safety commitments for generative AI      Read more                    Blog     Generative AI highlights the importance of family conversations about online safety      Read more                    Blog     Disrupting a global cybercrime network abusing generative AI      Read more                    Blog     Tackling abusive AI-generated content risks through education and empowerment      Read more                    Blog     Innovating in line with the European Union’s AI Act      Read more                    Videos     Azure AI Content Safety demos and quick tutorials for developers      Watch the videos                    GitHub     Explore sample code and assets for Azure AI Content Safety training      Find Examples                 Back to Responsible AI in action - Reliability and safety tab section                         Privacy and security                  Previous Slide                                                                                                                                        Next Slide            News     Safeguarding AI against “jailbreaks” and other prompt attacks      Read more                    News     Red teams think like hackers to help keep AI safe      Read more                    Blog     Technical deep dive into Azure AI confidential inferencing      Read more                    Research     Reducing data leakage risks in AI models      Read more                    Blog     Expanding AccountGuard to counter growing cyberthreats in Africa      Read more                    Blog     Enhancing trust and protecting privacy in the AI era      Read more                    Blog     Protecting the data of our commercial and public sector customers in the AI era      Read more                    Talk     Ensuring privacy in AI with homomorphic encryption      Watch the video                    Project     Confidential AI from Microsoft      Read more                    Blog     How Microsoft protects AI platforms against cyberthreats      Learn more                 Back to Responsible AI in action - Privacy and security tab section                         Inclusiveness                  Previous Slide                                                                                                 Next Slide            Research     Accelerating multilingual Retrieval-Augmented Generation systems      Read more                    News     Stories of AI impact in 2024      Read more                    Blog     Improving disability representation to drive AI innovation      Read more                    Blog     The technology, people, partnerships, and policies driving a more accessible future      Read more                    Blog     Microsoft collaborates with partners and policymakers to advance accessibility      Read more                    Blog     Microsoft’s pledge to the National AI Research Resource pilot      Read more                    Blog     Six ways to improve accessibility with Azure AI      Read more                 Back to Responsible AI in action - Inclusiveness tab section                         Transparency                  Previous Slide                                                                       Next Slide            News     Fighting deepfakes with more transparency about AI      Read more                    Report     Developing safe, secure, and trustworthy AI      Read more                    Blog     Providing further transparency on our responsible AI efforts      Read more                    Book chapter     Using a human-centered agenda for intelligible machine learning      Read more                    Publication     Enhancing transparency and accountability in AI with datasheets for datasets      Read more                 Back to Responsible AI in action - Transparency tab section                         Accountability                  Previous Slide                                                                       Next Slide            News     Making it easier for companies to build and ship AI people can trust      Read more                    Blog     Taking legal action to protect the public from abusive AI-generated content      Read more                    Blog     Disrupting a global cybercrime network abusing generative AI      Read more                    Forum     Redefining AI with in-house models and transparency      Read more                    Blog     Announcing Microsoft’s AI Customer Commitments      Read more                  Back to Responsible AI in action - Accountability tab section                    How Microsoft implements responsible AI     Explore how Microsoft empowers employees across the organization to be champions of responsible AI.                       Policy   Research   Engineering       Previous    Next                     Governance         We set rules for enacting responsible AI and clearly define roles and responsibilities for teams involved.                     Team enablement         We foster readiness to adopt responsible AI practices, both within our company and with our customers and partners.                     Sensitive use         We review sensitive use cases to ensure we are upholding our responsible AI principles.                     Public policy         We work to shape new laws and standards to help ensure that the promise of AI is realized for society at large.                                 Overview         Researchers in Aether, Microsoft Research, and our engineering teams keep our Responsible AI Standard on the leading edge.                     AI research         Teams conduct rigorous AI research, including on transparency, fairness, human-AI collaboration, privacy, security, safety and the impact of AI on people and society.                     Perspectives         Our researchers actively participate in broader discussions and debates to ensure that our responsible AI program integrates big-picture perspectives and input.                                Building responsible AI tooling and systems         Engineering teams define and operationalize a tooling and system strategy for using AI responsibly.                     Engineering practices         Engineering leaders identify and implement engineering practices that integrate responsible AI into everyday work.                     Compliance mechanisms         Engineering teams implement compliance tooling to help monitor and enforce responsible AI rules and requirements.                    Back to tabs                       SECURITY AND COMPLIANCE     The Microsoft 2025 Responsible AI Transparency Report     Our annual responsible AI report reflects a commitment to openness and ethical AI development. Explore the 2025 report to learn how Microsoft:       Builds generative AI systems responsibly.Makes decisions about releasing these systems.Helps customers build AI responsibly.Evolves our responsible AI program.        Get the 2025 report   Get the 2024 report                               Transparency documents     Transparency documents     Understand how our AI technology works, so you can create a system that fits your needs.                                Azure AI Face        Enhance efficiency, security, and customer experiences with systems that analyze people’s faces.        Read more                 Anomaly Detector        Analyze time series data using timestamps and numerical metrics to receive the anomalous status of each data point along with contributing variables.        Read more                 Azure AI Search        Get AI-enhanced tools, APIs, and SDKs for building rich search experiences for diverse content in web, mobile, and enterprise apps.        Read more                  Speech to text        Convert spoken audio into text to support more than 140 locales (part of Azure AI services).        Read more                 Spatial Analysis        Enable advanced natural language video search using vector-based matching on vision and speech transcripts.         Read more                 Custom named entity recognition        Use machine learning in a cloud-based API service to build models for extracting domain-specific entities from unstructured text.        Read more                  Pronunciation Assessment        Evaluate speech pronunciation in multiple languages for feedback on accuracy, fluency, vocabulary, grammar, and topic understanding.        Read more                  Text to speech        Convert written text into high-quality speech audio while supporting prebuilt, custom neural voices and offering visual capabilities with synthetic video avatars.        Read more               Load more                             Frequently asked questions        Expand all     Collapse all              01/       What are AI principles and why are they important?           AI principles are guidelines designed to ensure the responsible development and deployment of AI technologies. These principles are crucial because they help mitigate risks, promote ethical practices, and maximize the benefits of AI for society.  The Responsible AI Standard at Microsoft consolidates essential practices to ensure compliance with emerging AI laws and regulations.              02/       Are there tools available to help my organization implement responsible AI practices?           Microsoft offers a range of tools and practices to help organizations practice responsible AI.  Additionally, the Responsible AI Standard at Microsoft helps define product development requirements for responsible AI.              03/       What are Transparency Notes and how do I use them?           Transparency Notes are created to help customers better understand the inner workings of AI technologies and make more informed decisions about their use. They are part of the Responsible AI Standard and are intended to support responsible AI development by providing insights into how AI systems are governed, mapped, measured, and managed.  Microsoft also offers the Responsible AI Transparency Report, which provides insights into how Microsoft builds apps with generative AI, oversees the deployment of those apps, supports customers as they build their own AI apps, and fosters a responsible AI community.                              Discover more                                   Tools and practices      Get tools to support responsible AI practices        Explore tools                          AI policy and regulation      Discover the latest perspectives on AI policy from Microsoft experts           Explore policies                      Explore Microsoft AI      Learn how to securely integrate AI for a range of business needs           Learn more                                          Follow Microsoft                                                                         Azure AI Face        Enhance efficiency, security, and customer experiences with systems that analyze people’s faces.        Read more                 Anomaly Detector        Analyze time series data using timestamps and numerical metrics to receive the anomalous status of each data point along with contributing variables.        Read more                 Azure AI Search        Get AI-enhanced tools, APIs, and SDKs for building rich search experiences for diverse content in web, mobile, and enterprise apps.        Read more                  Speech to text        Convert spoken audio into text to support more than 140 locales (part of Azure AI services).        Read more                 Spatial Analysis        Enable advanced natural language video search using vector-based matching on vision and speech transcripts.        Read more                 Custom named entity recognition        Use machine learning in a cloud-based API service to build models for extracting domain-specific entities from unstructured text.        Read more                  Pronunciation Assessment        Evaluate speech pronunciation in multiple languages for feedback on accuracy, fluency, vocabulary, grammar, and topic understanding.        Read more                  Text to speech        Convert written text into high-quality speech audio while supporting prebuilt, custom neural voices and offering visual capabilities with synthetic video avatars.        Read more                 Custom Vision        Classify and detect objects in images based on visual characteristics, so you can build, deploy, and improve your image identification system.        Read more                 QnA Maker        Create a conversational layer over your data using Azure resources to find the best answer for natural language inputs from a custom knowledge base.        Read more                 Azure AI Vision—OCR        Extract text from images and documents in multiple languages. Handwritten text is also supported in English.        Read more                 Question answering        Build conversational apps, like social media apps, chatbots, and speech-enabled desktop apps, that communicate with users in natural language.        Read more                 Personally identifiable information (PII)        Identify and categorize personal entities, including PII and protected health information, from text.        Read more                 Text Analytics for health        Find and label health information in unstructured text to support customization and multiple languages.        Read more                 Language Understanding        Interpret natural language text, predict overall meaning, and extract specific information for client apps, like chatbots.        Read more                 Personalizer        Use reinforcement learning to help apps choose the best content for users—it continuously improves based on their reactions and contextual information.        Read more                 Azure AI Vision: Image Analysis        Process media assets to extract visual features, like objects and people, for knowledge mining, automation, and accessibility.        Read more                 Azure Video Indexer        Analyze video and audio files with AI to generate insights like detected objects, faces, and transcriptions in more than 60 languages.        Read more                 Conversational language understanding        Interpret natural language text so client apps, like chatbots, can understand and act on user requests.        Read more                 Use cases for custom text classification        Build custom models for text classification tasks that support both single and multiple label classifications.        Read more                 Sentiment Analysis        Evaluate text to detect positive, neutral, and negative sentiments. You’ll receive scores and labels for each sentence in various scenarios.        Read more                 Azure AI Language        Azure AI Language is a cloud-based service that provides Natural Language Processing (NLP) features for text mining and text analysis        Read more                 Summarization        Condense articles, papers, and documents into key takeaways, so developers can build intelligent solutions.        Read more                 Onco-Phenotype        Work with models that help solve multiple high-value business problems that require insights based on clinical data.        Read more                 Trial Matcher        Match patients to suitable clinical trials based on unique characteristics and trial criteria.        Read more                 Azure OpenAI Service        Use OpenAI models to generate natural language, code, and images. Integrated content filtering and abuse detection is included.        Read more                 Key Phrase Extraction        Quickly identify main concepts in text. You’ll receive key points like "food" and "wonderful staff" while discarding nonessential words.        Read more                 Azure AI Content Safety        Detect harmful content in apps and services using text, image, and multimodal APIs—plus, use custom categories for tailored content moderation needs.        Read more                 Language Detection        Across multiple languages and dialects, identify the input text language, and get a single language code with a confidence score for each document.        Read more                 Custom named entity recognition        Build custom models for extracting domain-specific entities from unstructured text.        Read more                    






What's new


Surface Pro


Surface Laptop


Surface Laptop Studio 2


Copilot for organizations


Copilot for personal use


AI in Windows


Explore Microsoft products


Windows 11 apps




Microsoft Store


Account profile


Download Center


Microsoft Store support


Returns


Order tracking


Certified Refurbished


Microsoft Store Promise


Flexible Payments




Education


Microsoft in education


Devices for education


Microsoft Teams for Education


Microsoft 365 Education


How to buy for your school


Educator training and development


Deals for students and parents


AI for education






Business


Microsoft Cloud


Microsoft Security


Dynamics 365


Microsoft 365


Microsoft Power Platform


Microsoft Teams


Microsoft 365 Copilot


Small Business




Developer & IT


Azure


Microsoft Developer


Microsoft Learn


Support for AI marketplace apps


Microsoft Tech Community


Azure Marketplace


AppSource


Visual Studio




Company


Careers


About Microsoft


Company news


Privacy at Microsoft


Investors


Diversity and inclusion


Accessibility


Sustainability






English (United States)


Your Privacy Choices Opt-Out Icon





Your Privacy Choices




Your Privacy Choices Opt-Out Icon





Your Privacy Choices



Consumer Health Privacy




Sitemap


Contact Microsoft


Privacy 


Manage cookies


Terms of use


Trademarks


Safety & eco


Recycling


About our ads

© Microsoft 2025








                                           AI-powered assistant  Created with Copilot Studio                         AI-powered assistant Created with Copilot Studio             Can we help you?                AI-powered assistant is available 24x7.       Chat now   No thanks          
