





























Your partner for digital transformation | Orange Business










      Skip to main content
    










 Careers 









Global (English)







                  Select your country
                





                    I can’t find my country




Argentina (Español)


Australia


Belgium (English)


Brasil (Português)


Chile (Español)


China


Colombia (Español)


Denmark


Egypt


España (Español)


Finland


France


Germany (English)


Hong-Kong


India


Japan (日本語)


Kingdom of Saudi Arabia


Luxembourg (English)


Malaysia


Mauritius


México (Español)


Morocco


Netherlands (English)


New-Zealand


Norge


Perú (Español)


Qatar


Russia


Schweiz (Deutsch)


Singapore


South Africa


Suisse (Français)


Sverige (svensk)


Taiwan


Tunisia


Turkey


United Arab Emirates



Global (English)








 Get help 





 My service space 





















          Expertise
        





          Digital infrastructure
          



          Employee experience
          



          Customer experience
          



          Operational experience
          



          Cybersecurity
          



          Data & AI
          



          Digital Trust
          





 Digital infrastructure 











Digital consulting
Take advantage of our expertise, strategy and innovation with digital consulting for seamless transitions, optimized operations and competitive edge. 



        Link to Digital consulting
      













SASE (Secure Access Service Edge)
Empower your teams to work together from anywhere with a secure, distributed network that’s designed to fit your needs. 



        Link to SASE (Secure Access Service Edge)
      













Cloud networking
We design, build and manage secure, scalable, automated cloud infrastructure for your global cloud estate with reliable services and guaranteed SLAs.



        Link to Cloud networking
      













Multi-cloud optimization
Multi-cloud optimization lets you tailor your cloud strategy to your unique needs, while optimizing performance, cost efficiency and resilience.



        Link to Multi-cloud optimization
      













With Orange Quantum Defender the Quantum threat stops here !
Protect critical assets with Quantum-safe solutions, including Post-Quantum Cryptography and Quantum Key Distribution.​



        Link to With Orange Quantum Defender the Quantum threat stops here !
      





              All digital infrastructure
                          


 Employee experience 











Implement a collaboration solution designed for your employees
Unleash potential with a secure, collaborative work environment tailored to each individual employee.



        Link to Implement a collaboration solution designed for your employees
      













Provide an outstanding employee experience
Boost your performance and your appeal by ensuring a high-performance, agile and innovative work environment.



        Link to Provide an outstanding employee experience
      













Enable efficient hybrid working
Establish and secure hybrid working for the long term.



        Link to Enable efficient hybrid working
      













Manage growing complexity
Successfully transform the management of your digital work environment.



        Link to Manage growing complexity
      













Contribute positively to your social and environmental objectives
Build a sustainable, inclusive and sovereign digital work environment.



        Link to Contribute positively to your social and environmental objectives
      





              All employee experience
                          


 Customer experience 











Cognitive omnichannel customer experience
Focus on omni-channel marketing to improve customer satisfaction and cognitive experience to increase responsiveness. 



        Link to Cognitive omnichannel customer experience
      













Digital omnipresence and data value creation
Transform your business with digital omnipresence and the power of data for an exceptional, personalized customer experience.



        Link to Digital omnipresence and data value creation
      













Human interaction at the right time
Put people at the heart of your CX strategy. Gauging emotions and responses help you deliver the right balance of technology and human contact.



        Link to Human interaction at the right time
      





              All customer experience 
                          


 Operational experience 











Secure and flexible infrastructure
Build digital infrastructure for operational excellence and sustainable business outcomes.



        Link to Secure and flexible infrastructure
      













Connected smart products
Enhance efficiency, deliver real-time insights and enable seamless customization with connected smart products.



        Link to Connected smart products
      













Operational efficiency
Improve quality and productivity through automation, supervision, digitization and optimization technologies.



        Link to Operational efficiency
      













Assisted workers
Empower employee efficiency and increase workplace safety with IT solutions.



        Link to Assisted workers
      





              All operational experience 
                          


 Cybersecurity 




Secure the enterprise




        Link to Secure the enterprise
      





              All cybersecurity
                          


 Data & AI 











AI, Generative AI, and Intelligent Agents — Power Up Your Performance
At Orange Business, we support you end-to-end with trusted solutions and services that ensure the success of your AI strategy and projects.





        Link to AI, Generative AI, and Intelligent Agents — Power Up Your Performance
      













Data Management: Take control of your data assets
Data Management ensures your data is usable, high-quality, secure, and governed. It also guarantees compliance with key regulations such as GDPR, NIS2, and the AI Act, while giving your business teams fast, easy access to reliable information.



        Link to Data Management: Take control of your data assets
      













Data Architecture: Design and deploy your technology platform
Combining strategic guidance with hands-on implementation, our approach ensures your platform is aligned with both business goals and technical requirements. The result: a coherent, agile, and high-performing data environment that enables optimal data usage across your organization.



        Link to Data Architecture: Design and deploy your technology platform
      













Data Intelligence: See Clearly. Decide Confidently. 
Our Business Intelligence services help you transform raw data into strategic insights — by putting the right processes, tools, and methods in place to drive smarter decisions, foster innovation, and create lasting value.



        Link to Data Intelligence: See Clearly. Decide Confidently. 
      





              All our Data &AI expertise
                          


 Digital Trust 











Relying on a resilient and secure infrastructure
Digital trust relies on resilient, secure connectivity, enabling access to trusted digital infrastructures. Orange Business uses its own network to create the digital services of tomorrow.



        Link to Relying on a resilient and secure infrastructure
      





              All digital trust
                          





          Solutions
        





          Data, AI & IoT
          



          Internet and networks
          



          Fixed-line and VoIP telephony
          



           Mobility
          



          Collaboration and remote working
          



          Security
          



          Cloud
          



          Customer experience
          



          Consulting and digital transformation
          





 Data, AI & IoT 




Flux Vision: improve your customer knowledge
Drive your business with insightful statistics on people-mobility patterns using mobile network data



        Link to Flux Vision: improve your customer knowledge
      






Live Objects: a secure platform for your objects and data
Boost the potential of your IoT projects with our secure, cloud-based platform



        Link to Live Objects: a secure platform for your objects and data
      






IoT Managed Global Connectivity: reliable and highly-secure IoT cellular connectivity for the worldwide deployment of your devices
Empower your IoT-connected devices on the Orange global cellular network



        Link to IoT Managed Global Connectivity: reliable and highly-secure IoT cellular connectivity for the worldwide deployment of your devices
      













Live Intelligence
Optimising the operational efficiency of your team with generative AI



        Link to Live Intelligence
      





              See all
                              (4)
                          


 Internet and networks 











Flexible SD-WAN
Unleash the potential of your network securely with Flexible SD-WAN



        Link to Flexible SD-WAN
      













Internet Platinum
Internet Platinum offers dedicated Internet access with 100% guaranteed bandwidth on the Orange network.



        Link to Internet Platinum
      













Evolution Platform Catalog
Design, deploy and easily manage a platform of connectivity, cybersecurity and cloud services that keeps pace with the changing needs of your business. 



        Link to Evolution Platform Catalog
      













Virtual Network Edge
Unlock the power of virtualized connectivity at the edge of your network.



        Link to Virtual Network Edge
      





              See all
                              (14)
                          


 Fixed-line and VoIP telephony 




Business Talk: rationalize telephony services to any country around the world
Connect all your offices around the world with seamless voice services



        Link to Business Talk: rationalize telephony services to any country around the world
      





              See all
                              (1)
                          


  Mobility 




Multisourcing Service Integration for Mobility: a simple answer to managing international mobility
Simplify and optimize the management of multiple mobile service providers



        Link to Multisourcing Service Integration for Mobility: a simple answer to managing international mobility
      






Device Management Premium: unified endpoint management to manage, configure and secure enterprise devices, applications, content and access to corporate resources
Securely and privately access corporate data and apps using any device with unified endpoint management from Orange



        Link to Device Management Premium: unified endpoint management to manage, configure and secure enterprise devices, applications, content and access to corporate resources
      






Telecom Expense Management: a single platform to manage your telecom assets
Optimize the costs of your enterprise mobile fleet



        Link to Telecom Expense Management: a single platform to manage your telecom assets
      






International Mobility Management: deploy and manage your mobility solutions
Deploy and manage your global mobility solutions with a comprehensive suite of expert services



        Link to International Mobility Management: deploy and manage your mobility solutions
      





              See all
                              (5)
                          


 Collaboration and remote working 




Business Together Cisco: your dedicated unified communications and collaboration solution
Improve productivity with a flexible suite of unified communications services for large enterprises



        Link to Business Together Cisco: your dedicated unified communications and collaboration solution
      






Business Together with Microsoft: a flexible suite of communication and collaboration services
Increase teamwork and productivity with our flexible suite of communications and collaboration tools



        Link to Business Together with Microsoft: a flexible suite of communication and collaboration services
      






Open Videopresence: videoconferencing solutions adapted to your needs
Collaborate around the world with premium, interactive virtual conference rooms



        Link to Open Videopresence: videoconferencing solutions adapted to your needs
      





              See all
                              (5)
                          


 Security 











Anticipate
Proactive cybersecurity: anticipate and prevent digital threats.



        Link to Anticipate
      













Detect and Respond
Orange Cyberdefense provides comprehensive cybersecurity by detecting real-time threats and responding swiftly to minimize damage. 



        Link to Detect and Respond
      













Protect
A comprehensive set of protection solutions to secure endpoints, networks and data, ensuring continuous operations and mitigating cybersecurity risks.



        Link to Protect
      






Managed DDoS Protection: defend against all types of denial-of-service attacks
Protect your activities from denial-of-service attacks



        Link to Managed DDoS Protection: defend against all types of denial-of-service attacks
      





              See all
                              (17)
                          


 Cloud 






Cloud Services
Professional and managed services in the cloud



        Link to Cloud Services
      






Galerie: secure access to the cloud via your VPN or SD-WAN
Enable secure access to cloud services via your VPN or SD-WAN



        Link to Galerie: secure access to the cloud via your VPN or SD-WAN
      








Private and hybrid cloud
Our private and hybrid cloud solutions to facilitate your digital transformation.



        Link to Private and hybrid cloud
      








On demand Cloud Connect
Create and manage your connections to the cloud with complete autonomy



        Link to On demand Cloud Connect
      





              See all
                              (8)
                          


 Customer experience 




Robotic Process Automation: build the workforce of tomorrow
Build the workforce of tomorrow



        Link to Robotic Process Automation: build the workforce of tomorrow
      






Callbot: reinventing customer service with enhanced, future-ready self service
Boost the potential of your calling experience



        Link to Callbot: reinventing customer service with enhanced, future-ready self service
      








Unified Engagement Suite - Genesys
Augment your customer experience by seamlessly orchestrating the entire customer journey. Harness the power of advanced tools, like predictive routing, agent assist, AI and omnichannel conversations, to boost your contact center KPIs.



        Link to Unified Engagement Suite - Genesys
      






Managed Voice Portal: perfect your self-services experience
Build a next-generation, AI-powered calling experience



        Link to Managed Voice Portal: perfect your self-services experience
      





              See all
                              (13)
                          


 Consulting and digital transformation 






Multisourcing Service Integration
Centrally manage all of your IT services expenses and performance



        Link to Multisourcing Service Integration
      








Deployment Services
Purchase, delivery and installation of your IT infrastructure components at all your international locations



        Link to Deployment Services
      





              See all
                              (12)
                          





          Customer stories
        





          The latest
          





 The latest 










Aberg Connect launches Europe-wide tire pressure monitoring system




        Link to Aberg Connect launches Europe-wide tire pressure monitoring system
      












Amerigo migrates to a single cloud: maximum security objectives




        Link to Amerigo migrates to a single cloud: maximum security objectives
      












Colgate-Palmolive adopts SD-WAN to help enable business agility and change




        Link to Colgate-Palmolive adopts SD-WAN to help enable business agility and change
      












For the MPSA Group, AWS cloud brings security, flexibility and innovation




        Link to For the MPSA Group, AWS cloud brings security, flexibility and innovation
      












Mondelēz International carries out major global communications transformation




        Link to Mondelēz International carries out major global communications transformation
      












Toyota gets connected cars in the right lane to identify traffic hazard spots and improve roadsafety




        Link to Toyota gets connected cars in the right lane to identify traffic hazard spots and improve roadsafety
      





              All our customer stories
                          





          News and events
        





          All our content
          





 All our content 











Our latest news




        Link to Our latest news
      













Read our posts




        Link to Read our posts
      





              All our content
                          





          About us
        





          Who we are
          



          Our partners
          



          What analysts say
          





 Who we are 











Our story




        Link to Our story
      













Corporate social responsibility
We firmly believe that every technological advancement should benefit humanity, society and the planet. We advocate for an ethical, responsible and inclusive visualization of digital technologies.



        Link to Corporate social responsibility
      













Join us
Together, let’s imagine and build a more harmonious future for generations to come. Embark on a journey to gain valuable experience and explore unprecedented possibilities. At Orange, we are committed to unlocking the unique potential within each individual.



        Link to Join us
      













Our expertise
Rely on our know-how as a network and digital integrator and our extensive experience in next-generation connectivity solutions to make your digital transformation efficient and sustainable.



        Link to Our expertise
      






 Our partners 










Dell Technologies
Pioneers of Innovation, we are driving the Digital Revolution



        Link to Dell Technologies
      












Equinix
We connect places, partners, and opportunities.



        Link to Equinix
      












Huawei 
A key global partner for a more sustainable and connected world



        Link to Huawei 
      












Splunk
Business Resilience Observability & Cybersecurity on a single platform



        Link to Splunk
      












VMware and Velocloud by Broadcom
Leader in cloud, network, and security virtualization



        Link to VMware and Velocloud by Broadcom
      





              All our partners
                          


 What analysts say 






All our analyst reports




        Link to All our analyst reports
      





              All analysts reports
                          











Search on Orange Business










Search on Orange Business




















 

















 



Orange Business: A leading network and digital integrator



Search on Orange Business



Popular requests

Live Intelligence
Evolution Platform
Cloud solution















Our expertise at your service
















  Digital infrastructure

Enjoy a scalable, responsive and secure digital infrastructure 






        Link to Digital infrastructure
      











  Employee experience

Energize the digital work environment






        Link to Employee experience
      











  Customer experience

Effectively orchestrate your customer experience






        Link to Customer experience
      











  Data & AI

Driving business value with Data & AI 






        Link to Data & AI
      











  Operational experience

Optimize industry by digitizing tools, processes and products






        Link to Operational experience
      











  Cybersecurity

Secure the enterprise






        Link to Cybersecurity
      











  Digital Trust

Build a trusted digital environment






        Link to Digital Trust
      


























 Gain valuable perspectives from industry analysts on our market presence and solutions. 
 
Discover the articles














Explore our solutions tailored for your business











 Security

Protect your corporate data and IT networks worldwide. As the European leader in cybersecurity,…



        Link to Security
      













 Cloud

Your business needs a global, agile, rapidly deployed network of infrastructure, platforms and…



        Link to Cloud
      













 Collaboration and remote working

Remote working has changed expectations, and employees are now looking for more flexibility and…



        Link to Collaboration and remote working
      













 Data, IA and IoT

Data fuels digital transformation, and IoT devices allow you to gather it fresh and close to your…



        Link to Data, IA and IoT
      













 Customer experience

You can enrich your customers’ experiences with simpler processes, personalized services and…



        Link to Customer experience
      













 Consulting and digital transformation

Consultancy, integration and execution are key success factors in every digital transformation…



        Link to Consulting and digital transformation
      













 Fixed-line and VoIP telephony

Voice is the backbone of mobility and unified communications and is crucial for customer and…



        Link to Fixed-line and VoIP telephony
      













 Internet and networks

A powerful and reliable corporate network is key to a successful digital business. Benefit from…



        Link to Internet and networks
      













 Mobility

The accelerated development of mobility and new working methods is bringing new challenges to your…



        Link to Mobility
      















Our customers endorsements



1/4










Sajith Chakkingal, Head of Global Technology Services, Global Delivery at TMF Group.
 "The TMF Group’s digital strategy combines both simplified and transformative capabilities, and the Orange Business solution provides us with exactly what our business demands: a flexible, reliable, globally distributed, centrally managed, cost-effective solution. We are embracing new digital deliver models to provide our customers with the valuable insights they need to add value to their organizations."


        Read the customer story
      






Haier
 "The comprehensively managed solutions portfolio Orange Business has provided has enabled Haier to integrate CCR quickly, securely, and seamlessly. It has also paved the way for further adoption of Evolution Platform as part of the multinational’s IT globalization strategy."


        Read the customer story
      






Zoran Margic, Business Development, Intis
 "Our vision is to create a completely self-driven, unattended retail company, and we hope that Orange Business will help us achieve that."


        Read the customer story
      






Wang Zihao, VP of Cainiao Logistics Technology Division
 "This privacy-focused approach aligns well with modern consumer expectations for data security and convenience, making it an extremely valuable addition to our delivery service capabilities”


        Read the customer story
      



















Our latest insights






 



 Blog 
 Jul 01 

Quantum-Safe Networking: Orange Quantum Defender protects your data and communication NOW!





          Link to Quantum-Safe Networking: Orange Quantum Defender protects your data and communication NOW!
        





                    See all insights
                  







 



 Blog 
 Apr 08 

        Building Strong Foundations for your AI Services:  How digital infrastructure can enable your data strategy
      



        Link to Building Strong Foundations for your AI Services:  How digital infrastructure can enable your data strategy
      








 



 Blog 
 May 07 

        NIS2 compliance: lessons learned by Orange Business?
      



        Link to NIS2 compliance: lessons learned by Orange Business?
      








 



 Blog 
 Apr 30 

        Digital workplace and EX: productivity and profitability possibilities
      



        Link to Digital workplace and EX: productivity and profitability possibilities
      





















A unique trusted partner
Orange Business is the Orange Group entity dedicated to businesses and organizations. Our unique history as a telco operator and now an IT services company enables us to support the sustainable digital transformation of enterprise businesses worldwide.


                        Who we are?
                      








 






To view this video content, you must accept YouTube cookies.
These cookies make it possible to share or react directly on the social networks to which you are connected or to integrate content initially posted on these social networks. They also allow social networks to use your visits to our sites and applications for personalization and targeting advertising.

















The figures show who we are







 #1 
Global voice and data network








 65 
countries: Team presence on all continents








 30,000+ 
B2B customers worldwide








 5,500+ 
AI, Data and Cloud experts








 6 
Major Service Centers covering all continents

















back to top






 Contact us


 Any question?

 Contact us














 Contact sales




We will get back to you and support you on your needs.











 Get help




Find support on Orange Business solutions & services











 Our local offices




Get in touch with your local account team.





















 Search on Orange Business 


                Close
              




      search











                Popular requests
              





       Live Intelligence
    





       Evolution Platform
    





       Cloud solution
    











Sitemap
















          Expertise
        


Digital infrastructure


Employee experience


Customer experience


Operational experience


Cybersecurity





          Solutions
        


Internet and networks


Fixed-line and VoIP telephony


Mobility


Collaboration and remote working


Security


Cloud


Customer experience


Data intelligence and IoT


Consulting and digital transformation services





          News and events
        


News


Articles


Webinars


White papers





          Customer stories
        


All our customer stories





          About us
        


Regional presence


Corporate social responsibility


Join us


Our expertise


Partners


Analysts


Press room





          Other links
        


Orange.com


Perspective


Group's websites


Our anti-corruption commitment











Cookie preferences


Cookie policy


Legal information


Privacy Policy


Accessibility: non-compliant


Rates, Terms and Conditions


Vendor policy


TSP Program Policy


 © Orange Business 2025










 Careers 











 My service space

 Orange Jobs







© Orange Business 2025





























