









AI Initiatives - Responsible AI - Sony Group Portal

































































menu








close










                    Businesses & Products
                    open




Businesses & Products Top



Games & Network Services




PlayStation




Sony Interactive Entertainment






Music




Pictures: Movies & TV Shows




Electronics: Entertainment Technology & Services




Consumer Electronics




Professional Products & Solutions






Imaging & Sensing Solutions




Financial Services




New Initiatives





Close







                    About Sony Group
                    open




About Sony Group Top



Sony's Purpose & Values




Message from the CEO




News Releases




Sony Corporate Blog




Brand




History




Corporate Data




Affiliated Companies





Close






                    Technology
                    open




Technology Top



Chief Digital Officer Message




Tech Stories




Programs & Events




Corporate Distinguished Engineer




Publications





Close






                    Sustainability
                    open




Sustainability Top



Vision of Founder andBasic Policy for Sustainability Initiatives




Sustainability Report




Environment




Social Contribution




Diversity




Accessibility




Response to COVID-19





Close






                    Design
                    open




Design Top



About




Design Stories




Interviews & Lectures




Gallery




News





Close






                    Employees / Careers
                    open




Employees Top
Careers Top


Close






                    Investor Relations
                    open




Investor Relations Top



IR News




IR Library




Corporate Report




Earning Announcement




Corporate Bonds & Ratings





Close







Contact Us








Search button in the site






Search













Home
Technology
Responsible AI




Responsible AI

Japanese










contents menu









Organizational Structure
Promoting Responsible AI
Related Sony Group Initiatives









Responsible AI
In line with the Sony Group Code of Conduct, Sony promotes the responsible use of AI. Sony has introduced policies such as the Sony Group AI Ethics Guidelines and has put appropriate AI governance frameworks in place to ensure thorough compliance with relevant laws and regulations alongside adherence to these internal policies. Sony also engages in dialogue with diverse stakeholders in its active pursuit of accountability and transparency.







Organizational Structure


Sony has been building and strengthening systems in support of responsible AI use since 2018. Notable milestones in this area are shown below.


■Milestones

2018：
Established Sony Group AI Ethics Guidelines
2019：
Established Sony Group AI Ethics Committee
2021：
Established AI Ethics Office (currently the AI Governance Office) within Sony Group Corporation
2023-2024：
Established internal guidelines governing use of generative AI tools at major Sony Group companies
2025：
Established Sony Global AI Governance Policy to ensure thorough compliance with relevant laws, regulations, and internal policies









Promoting Responsible AI


Response to AI Ethics Risks
Through the utilization of artificial intelligence (AI), Sony aims to contribute to the development of a peaceful and sustainable society while delivering kando—a sense of excitement, wonder and emotion—to the world. At the same time, Sony understands that the influence of AI on society is multi-faceted and can have unintended consequences.
In line with this understanding, the Sony Group Code of Conduct, which guides Sony’s day-to-day operations, sets out Sony’s commitment to ethical development and use of technology, together with compliance with relevant laws and regulations and internal policies. Sony also advances wide-ranging dialogue with stakeholders in the active pursuit of accountability and transparency regarding the development and utilization of AI technology.
This stance is clearly demonstrated by the Sony Group AI Ethics Guidelines, which Sony established in September 2018 and set forth policies for how all Sony officers and employees should utilize AI and conduct AI-related R&D in order to ensure harmony with wider society. The guidelines comprise the following items:

Sony Group AI Ethics Guidelines

Supporting Creative Life Styles and Building a Better Society
Stakeholder Engagement
Provision of Trusted Products and Services
Privacy Protection
Respect for Fairness
Pursuit of Transparency
The Evolution of AI and Ongoing Education

One initiative rooted in these guidelines covers electronics and other products equipped with AI. From early in the commercialization process, elements such as fairness and transparency are evaluated based on pre-defined requirements to confirm that appropriate measures are being implemented.
Major Sony Group companies have also established and applied internal guidelines covering generative AI tools as they advance the responsible use of this technology.


AI Governance
Sony continues to build and develop frameworks to ensure the appropriate application of policies and guidelines.
For example, the Sony Group AI Ethics Committee, which comprises Sony Group executives with diverse backgrounds, checks and reviews Sony’s use of AI and related research and development from a variety of viewpoints to ensure that activities are conducted appropriately from societal and ethical perspectives, in accordance with the Sony Group AI Ethics Guidelines.
In recent years, Sony has introduced AI governance policies that ensure strict adherence to laws, regulations and internal policies governing the development, use, and provision of AI, and Sony has created as well as operates and improves structures to safeguard AI governance across the entire Sony Group. These frameworks also contribute to the integration of such policies and guidelines within each Sony Group company.
In addition, while the AI Governance Office (formerly the AI Ethics Office) was established as an organization mainly intended to provide all Sony Group businesses with specialist knowledge regarding AI ethics, its role has expanded alongside the introduction of AI governance policies. The office currently advances the creation, operation and improvement of AI governance structures across Sony Group while also raising awareness of responsible AI use within Sony Group and supports the promotion of AI governance in each of Sony Group’s businesses. Through these activities, it reinforces the frameworks described earlier in this section.


Sony Group AI Ethics Guidelines（PDF）







Related Sony Group Initiatives


Integrity and Sincerity are the key Values to achieving Sony's Purpose. The Sony Group Code of
                  Conduct sets forth a standard of daily behavior based on these Values. The Code of Conduct
                  supports Sony's value creation and serves as the basis for earning the trust for the Sony brand
                  through the ethical and responsible conduct of every Sony Group employee.

Sony Group Code of Conduct



Sony also believes that all human beings should be treated with dignity and respect. This commitment is established by the Sony Group Code of Conduct. In regards to ethical issues
                  related to the use of AI, we are responding sincerely from the perspective of fairness and
                  transparency while engaging in dialogue with stakeholders.

Sony's Approach to Respect for Human Rights














Home
Technology
Responsible AI















Terms and Conditions
Privacy Policy
Cookie Policy

Customize Cookies

About this Site
Site Map


Copyright 2025 Sony Group Corporation














