White Paper Guidelines for AI Procurement September 2019 
World Economic Forum 91-93 route de la Capite CH-1223 Cologny/Geneva Switzerland Tel.: +41 (0)22 869 1212 Fax: +41 (0)22 786 2744 Email: contact@weforum.org www.weforum.org © 2019 World Economic Forum. All rights  reserved. No part of this publication may be  reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any  means, including photocopying and recording, or  by any information storage and retrieval system.This white paper has been published by the World Economic Forum as a contribution to a project,  insight area or interaction. The findings, interpretations and conclusions expressed herein are a re sult of a collaborative process facilitated and endorsed by the World Economic Forum, but whose  results do not necessarily represent the views of the World Economic Forum, nor the entirety of its  Members, Partners or other stakeholders.
3 Guidelines for AI ProcurementWhat is artificial intelligence (AI)?  Why do we need guidelines for public procurement of AI? How were these guidelines developed? How to use the guidelines  Guidelines overview Detailed explanation of guidelines  Endnotes4 4 5 5 6 7 17Contents
4 Guidelines for AI ProcurementWhat is artificial intelligence (AI)?  AI has been formally defined as “technologies [that] aim to reproduce or surpass abilities (in computational systems) that  would require ‘intelligence’ if humans were to perform them. These include: learning and adaptation; sensory understanding  and interaction; reasoning and planning; optimization of procedures and parameters; autonomy; and creativity”.1 New AI approaches developed in the past decade, particularly the use of deep-learning neural networks, have dramatically  advanced the capability of AI to recognize complex patterns, optimize for specific outcomes and make automated  decisions. Doing this requires massive amounts of relevant data, a strong algorithm, a narrow domain and a concrete goal,  and can result in dramatic improvements in reliability, efficiency and productivity.  Why do we need guidelines for public procurement of AI? Governments are increasingly seeking to capture the  opportunities offered by AI to improve public-sector productivity  and the provision of services to the public, and to stimulate  the economy. AI holds the potential to vastly improve  government operations and meet the needs of citizens in  new ways, ranging from traffic management to healthcare  delivery to processing tax forms. However, governments often  lack experience in acquiring modern AI solutions and many  public institutions are cautious about harnessing this powerful  technology. Guidelines for public procurement can help in a  number of ways.  First, government and the general public have justified  concerns over bias, privacy, accountability, transparency and  overall complexity. New incidents are emerging of negative  consequences arising from the use of AI in areas such as  criminal sentencing, law enforcement and even employment  opportunities. As citizens increasingly demand the same level  of service from their governments as they do from innovative  private-sector companies, public officials will be required not  only to identify the specific benefits AI can bring, but also to  understand the negative outcomes that can be generated.  Governments do not have the latitude of using the inscrutable  “black box” algorithms that increasingly characterize AI  deployed by industry. Without clear guidance on how to ensure  accountability, transparency and explainability, governments  may fail in their responsibility to meet public expectations of  both expert and democratic oversight of algorithmic decisionmaking and may inadvertently create new risks or harms.  Governments rely on the expertise, and previously developed  models, of technology providers and may lack the necessary  skills to fully understand or trace algorithmic causality.  Technology providers understand these challenges and look  to governments to create clarity and predictability about  how to manage them, starting in the procurement process.  While companies are generally wary of stricter guidelines  for government procurement, common-sense frameworks  can help governments overcome reluctance to procure complex new technologies and actually open new markets for  companies. Transparent guidelines will permit both established  companies and new entrants to the AI space to compete on a  level playing field for government contracts.    Second, AI procurement can build on a foundation of  previous efforts to improve the effectiveness and efficiency  of government technology procurement, which may include  legislation or policy measures such as frameworks, model  contracts, etc. Established principles of good government  technology procurement may take on added significance in AI  procurement. For example, many governments already ensure  that procurement efforts are run by multidisciplinary teams.  Experience has shown that a lack of diversity in AI teams and  positions of leadership has correlated with inadvertent harms  or discrimination to vulnerable minority groups and protected  classes. Given government’s role in upholding inclusion, an  added emphasis on a multidisciplinary approach and diversity  may be necessary in AI procurement.   Third, as noted, AI has advanced rapidly in recent years,  spurring further research and applications. New uses of AI that  are of interest to governments will continue to emerge and will  bring with them both benefits and risks. It is important that  governments prepare for this future now by investing in building  responsible practices for how they procure AI.   Finally, government procurement rules and purchasing  practices often have a strong influence on markets, particularly  in their early stages of development. As industry debates  setting its own standards on these technologies, the  government’s moral authority and credibility can help set a  baseline for these discussions.  Overall, the guidelines aim to guide all parties involved in the  procurement life cycle – policy officials, procurement officers,  data scientists, technology providers and their leaders –  towards the overarching goal of safeguarding public benefit  and well-being.  
5 Guidelines for AI ProcurementHow were these guidelines developed? How to use the guidelines  The guidelines provide fundamental considerations that  a government should address before acquiring and  deploying AI solutions and services. They apply once  it has been determined that the solution needed for  a problem could be AI-driven. The guidelines are not  intended as a silver bullet for solving all public sector  AI-adoption challenges, but by influencing how new AI  solutions are procured, they can set government use and  adoption of AI on a better path.    Specifically, the guidelines will help:   –Policy officials to accelerate attainment of their policy goals   –Procurement officials and commercial teams to  develop AI-related requests for proposals and to  manage procurement processes   –Data practitioners (e.g. statisticians, data scientists,  digital and technology experts) to safeguard public  benefit and identify and manage potential risks   –AI-solutions providers to better understand the core  expectations for government AI projects and to align  their proposals with emerging standards for public  procurement   The guidelines were developed by the World Economic Forum Centre for the Fourth Industrial Revolution, in  consultation with a multistakeholder community. Project fellows from the UK Government’s Office of AI, Deloitte  and Salesforce worked with Forum staff, and in partnership with Splunk-convened workshops with appropriate  representatives from government, academia, civil society and the private sector to explore key issues and co-design  responses.    The guidelines consist of 10 high-level recommendations,  ordered roughly sequentially in terms of their relevance to  the cumulative process of procurement, each containing:  –Multiple principles relating to each guideline  –Explanatory text elaborating on the thinking and  substance underlying each principle    As the technological sophistication, and the government  use, of AI evolves, the guidelines should be updated to  reflect new learning and leading practices. This is a living  document that is intended to integrate feedback from  practitioners over time. Much of that feedback will come  from two sources: the project’s community of subject  matter experts, and the pilots to be held with the UK,  the United Arab Emirates, Colombia and other partner  governments. We also welcome feedback from other  stakeholders and the general public. If you wish to provide  feedback, please share via email: AI@weforum.org .  Ultimately, the goal is that these guidelines will enable  governments and international bodies to set the right  policies, protocols and perhaps even standards to facilitate  effective, responsible and ethical public use of AI.    
6 Guidelines for AI ProcurementGuidelines overview What are the key considerations when starting a procurement process, writing a request for proposal (RFP), and evaluating  RFP responses? Guideline Principles 1. Use procurement processes that  focus not on prescribing a specific  solution but rather on outlining  problems and opportunities, and  allow room for iteration. a. Make use of innovative procurement processes to acquire AI systems. b. Focus on developing a clear problem statement, rather than on detailing  specifications of a solution.  c. Support an iterative approach to product development. 2. Define the public benefit of using AI  while assessing risks.a. Set out clearly in your RFP why you consider AI to be relevant to the problem and  be open to alternative technical solutions. b. Explain in your RFP that public benefit is a main driver of your decisionmaking process when assessing proposals. c. Conduct an initial AI risk and impact assessment before starting the procurement  process, ensure that your interim findings inform the RFP , and revisit the  assessment at decision points. 3. Align your procurement with relevant  existing governmental strategies and  contribute to their further improvement.a. Consult relevant governmental initiatives such as AI national strategies, innovation  and/or industrial strategies, and guidance documents informing public policy about  emerging technologies. b. Collaborate with other relevant government bodies and institutions to share insights  and learn from each other. 4. Incorporate potentially relevant  legislation and codes of practice in  your RFP .a. Conduct a review of relevant legislation, rights, administrative rules and other  relevant norms that govern the types of data and kinds of applications in scope  for the project and reference them in the RFP . b. Take into consideration the appropriate confidentiality, trade-secret protection,  and data-privacy best practices that may be relevant to the deployment of the  AI systems. 5. Articulate the technical and  administrative feasibility of accessing  relevant data. a. Ensure that you have proper data governance mechanisms in place from the start of  the procurement process. b. Assess whether relevant data will be available for the project.  c. Define if and how you will share data with the vendor(s) for the procurement initiative  and the subsequent project. 6. Highlight the technical and ethical  limitations of intended uses of data to  avoid issues such as historical data bias. a. Consider the susceptibility of data that could be in scope and if usage of the data  is fair. b. Highlight known limitations (e.g. quality) of the data in the RFP and require  tenderers to describe their strategies on how to address these shortcomings.  Have a plan for addressing relevant limitations that you may have missed. 7. Work with a diverse, multidisciplinary  team.a. Develop ideas and make decisions throughout the procurement process in a  multidisciplinary team.  b. Require the successful bidder(s) to assemble a team with the right skill set. 8. Focus throughout the procurement  process on mechanisms of  algorithmic accountability and of  transparency norms.a. Promote a culture of accountability across AI-powered solutions. b. Ensure that AI decision-making is as transparent   as possible. c. Explore mechanisms to enable interpretability of the algorithms internally and  externally as a means of establishing accountability and contestability. 9. Implement a process for the continued  engagement of the AI provider with the  acquiring entity for knowledge transfer  and long-term risk assessment. a. Consider during the procurement process that acquiring a tool that includes AI is  not a one-time decision; testing the application over its lifespan is crucial. b. Ask the AI provider to ensure that knowledge transfer and training are part of the  engagement. c. Ask the AI provider for insights on how to manage the appropriate use of the  application by non-specialists. 10. Create the conditions for a level and fair  playing field among AI solution providers.a. Reach out in various ways to a wide variety of AI solution providers. b. Engage vendors early and frequently throughout   the process. c. Ensure interoperability of AI solutions and require open licensing terms to avoid  vendor lock-in.
7 Guidelines for AI ProcurementDetailed explanation of guidelines  1. Use procurement processes that focus not  on prescribing a specific solution, but rather on  outlining problems and opportunities and allow  room for iteration.   Why is it important? To acquire the AI systems that best address the challenge  you want to address and encourage responsible innovation.    a. Make use of innovative procurement processes to  acquire AI systems.    –Innovation-oriented procurement procedures provide  opportunities to accelerate the adoption of new  technologies such as AI systems, to promote innovation  and to support secondary policy criteria such as support  for small and medium-sized enterprises and the ethical  development of AI.   –For example, these processes support early market  engagement, enable you to go to market in different  stages and can include the use of proofs of concept.  These provide the opportunity to test the technologies on your problem area before making a final buying  decision. Innovative public procurement processes that  include practices such as detailing challenging problems,  organizing technology contests, providing opportunities for  demonstrators, and giving newly established providers the  opportunity to compete for public-sector contracts, have  the potential to boost innovation and help new companies  become established. This market-making role also  encourages small enterprises with new ideas and reduces  the risks for new technology start-ups.  –By strategically choosing the procurement approach  depending on the nature of the challenge that you mean  to address, these processes could include, for example:   – Agile procurement processes that allow you to go  to market in different stages and can include proofs  of concept to test the technologies before the final  purchase. – Challenge-based procurement processes that have  vendors compete against each other based on their  AI skills and include an evaluation of the technologies  applied to the challenges they mean to address. 1.  Eligible government   organizations 4.  Private companies offer  answers2.  Submit eligible problems  they need to be resolved 5.  Five companies receive  up to £50,000 each for  prototyping in 12 weeks3.  Experts & GovTech   Steering Group review  and provide shortlist of 15 6.  Top two receive up to  £500,000 each, develop  product in 12 months7.  All products available to  public sector to buy – Innovation partnerships that enable the procurement  of technologies that cannot be delivered by the current  options available to the market. – Dynamic purchasing systems – procedures currently  used mainly for products commonly available on the  market – can accelerate uptake of technologies that are  rapidly developing. As a procurement tool, it is similar  in some ways to an electronic framework agreement but, as new suppliers can join at any time, this allows  newly established firms to participate in the framework  agreements when they meet the set criteria. – AI procurement frameworks that prescribe the terms  and conditions applying to any subsequent contract  and allow the pre-vetting of providers against a set of  predefined criteria that can include ethical requirements.  Visual to depict the challenge-based procurement process used by the UK GovTech Catalyst challenge
8 Guidelines for AI Procurement –When making use of novel approaches to procuring  emerging technologies you should also focus on best  practices that have been shown to increase the supplier  base of smaller and innovative suppliers, which is important  for fast-developing markets such as AI. These practices  include but are not limited to:   – Setting out and following a detailed procurement  timeline at the start of the campaign. – Breaking down large proposals into smaller work  components. – Encouraging collaboration between different bidders.   b. Focus on developing a clear problem statement, rather than  on detailing the specifications of a solution.    –AI technologies are developing rapidly, with new  technologies and products constantly being introduced to  the market. By focusing on describing the challenges and/ or opportunities that you want to address and drawing  on the expertise of technology partners, you can better  decipher what technology is most appropriate for the issue  at hand. By focusing on the challenge and/or opportunity,  you might also discover a higher-priority issue, or realize you  were focusing on a symptom rather than the root cause.  –Beyond playing to each stakeholder’s strength, this  approach has two added benefits. First, it demands and  promotes early market engagement, which we explain in  further detail in Guideline 10. Second, it makes it easier for  newer AI service providers (such as start-ups) to participate,  as the government will not be focused on a specific  product. Nurturing an emerging AI ecosystem is a key  economic investment in the future.   c. Support an iterative approach to product development.    –AI-powered solutions differ significantly from other  technology tools in their unique ability to learn and adapt  through ongoing, periodic training with new data. Therefore,  the procurement process should allow room for iteration,  while ensuring a robust, fair and transparent evaluation and  decision process.  –For example, a phased challenge-based procurement  could serve to evaluate different competitors’  minimum viable products (MVPs) during phase one of  procurement, with only the winner going on to develop  the full solution. This building and testing in phases within  the procurement cycle facilitates informed decisionmaking, innovation and transparency. It also provides  you with relevant information to conduct meaningful  impact assessments and evaluate risks. 2. Define the public benefit of using AI while  assessing risks. Why is this important? Defining the public benefit goal provides an anchor for the  overall project and procurement process that the AI is intended  to achieve. AI also brings new and specific risks that must be  identified and managed as early as the procurement phase of  the project. a. Set out clearly in your RFP why you consider AI to be  relevant to the problem and be open to alternative technical  solutions.  –In most circumstances, you should refer to the need for an  AI solution in your invitation to tender only if there is strong  indication that the technology will address the problem that  you are trying to solve. A need for the acquisition of an AI  system should arise through analysis of policy challenges  and alternatives, and be compared to other potential  courses of action when the AI project does not have a clear  research and innovation focus. If, during the evaluation  of the tender responses, it becomes evident that another  solution that doesn’t incorporate AI is better able to address  the problem, you should make the decision to follow this  alternative delivery path.  –Assess whether AI could be part of a solution to your  problem, before starting the procurement process. If  you lack the capabilities in your team to carry out this  assessment, you should seek these from elsewhere in  your organization or relevant professional network (e.g.  academia, trusted vendors) and make the consultation and  collaboration with appropriate stakeholders a priority. For  this assessment, it is crucial to engage a multistakeholder  community to define and test a clear policy problem  statement and reflect the findings in the RFP .  –Pre-market engagement is also often essential in helping  you to describe your problem and narrow down the  tasks that AI may be able to assist with. This will help  you better communicate to potential suppliers what you  are asking for and why, as well as highlighting where the  gaps are. Documenting user need and challenges to the  best of your ability is crucial, since the success of the  project also depends on how well AI system providers  understand the problem. b. Explain in your RFP that public benefit is a main driver of  your decision-making process when assessing proposals.  –When setting out the requirements in the RFP , you  should consider explicitly referring to public benefit  as well as user needs. When determining user needs,  public servants should be confident that they are  acting in the public benefit. With regard to AI systems,  the public benefit extends beyond value for money  and also includes considerations about transparency  of the decision-making process and other factors that  are included in these guidelines.   –In practice this requires you, for example, to specify  success and failure criteria in the context of public  benefit: What do you expect such a system to achieve  and be capable of, and what are the types of failure  and harm that must be avoided? Conducting an impact  assessment will help you to set these issues out. Refer  to Guideline 7 for additional information on adding ethical  requirements to the RFP .   c. Conduct an initial AI risk and impact assessment even  before starting the procurement process, ensure that your  interim findings inform the RFP, and revisit the assessment  at decision points.
9 Guidelines for AI Procurement –To better understand the potential impacts of the use  of AI and to mitigate the risks, it is important to start an  assessment in a systematic manner before the acquisition  of an AI system and to make sure that the findings also  inform your commercial strategy. There will be different  considerations depending on which policy challenges  you are trying to solve and which potential application of  AI could help to address this challenge. Without knowing  which AI system you will acquire, it is not possible to  conduct a whole assessment.   –An initial assessment should outline user needs and  affected communities, as well as potential risks such  as inaccuracy and bias of the AI system. It should  also include some consideration of scenarios involving  unintended consequences. The initial assessment  should make you think about strategies to address these  potential impacts, including but not limited to citizen  panels, transparency reports and testing on differentially  private or synthetic datasets. Associated risks and their  respective mitigation strategies must be recognized by  a suitable risk owner with decision-making power and  should include a go/no-go decision.   –In your invitation to tender, you should consider asking  potential suppliers to identify risks and explain how they  would mitigate them. This can give you valuable information  regarding how careful each tenderer is and how aware they are of potential risks. Where you identified significant risks  in your initial assessments, you should specifically require  tenderers to set out how they would address those.   –Data protection impact assessments and equality  impact assessments can provide a useful starting point  for assessing potential unintended consequences. In  assessing these, you should consider how the use of these  systems, such as semi-automated or solely automated  decisions, interact with mechanisms of oversight, review  and other safeguards. For examples of risk assessment  questionnaires for automated decision-making, refer to  the government of Canada’s Directive on Automated  Decision Making , and the framework on Algorithmic  Impact   Assessments  from AI Now.   –In addition to the above, there should be systematic and  continuous risk monitoring during every stage of the AI  solution’s life cycle, from design to post-implementation  maintenance. AI solution providers can do this by  identifying, drafting mitigations for and reporting risks  through a project management function, which is central  to the implementation (refer to Guideline 9 for more  information on how to consider life-cycle management  during the procurement process). The impact assessment  should be revisited where necessary (e.g. in the event of  significant changes to the opportunity statement).   SDLC stage Sample AI risk mitigation considerations 1. Requirements gathering and analysis  –Is the use of AI/ML necessary for the desired outcome?  –Should AI/ML even be discussed at this stage? 2. Design  –Do we have consent to use the data sources required by the solution?  –Do we fully understand the implications of using external data, models or  solutions? 3. Implementation and coding  –Do we have the right skills or domain expertise to develop the solution?  –Does the development process protect data confidentiality and integrity? 4. Testing  –What level and type of bias is acceptable in the solution?  –Do the acceptance criteria set appropriate levels of accuracy to ensure the model  performance is satisfactory? 5. Deployment  –Have users received adequate training to ensure they understand the output of  the system?  –Is it transparent to users how the solution is deriving an output? 6. Maintenance  –Do the system administrators know what metrics to examine to validate that  models are operating as expected?  –Is there a clear process for updating or refining models using new data?Visual of the SDLC stages, with sample AI risk assessment question for each stage.
10 Guidelines for AI Procurement3. Aim to include your procurement within a  strategy for AI adoption across government and  learn from others.   Why is it important? To ensure that you use procurement strategically to support  efforts on AI development and deployment, and to spread the  knowledge of the public application of an emerging technology. a. Consult relevant AI national strategy initiatives and guidance  documents from ministries and departments informing  public policy of emerging technologies.  –Many countries are currently in the process of drafting and  releasing national AI strategies, and some have already  published theirs. Prior to commencing an AI rollout,  evaluate how your pursuit of acquiring an AI system aligns  to your country’s overall strategy.  –This allows you to include secondary policy aims in  your strategic procurement and potentially make use of  economies of scale by pooling the demand for AI systems.  An added benefit of aligning to a national AI strategy is that  there may be special support for initiatives that align to the  strategy, such as access to additional experts. b. Consult with government agencies that have looked into  procuring AI solutions, irrespective of the outcome of the  procurement efforts.  –To improve your practices and share your experiences, you  could actively seek out collaboration across departments  and fields of expertise. You could also share knowledge and  feedback via expert communities, such as the digital-buying  community, professional networks or meet-ups.  –Within your department it can be helpful to set up platforms  and networks that allow for the exchange of information,  experiences and best practices about the purchasing of  AI-powered solutions.     4. Ensure that legislation and codes of practice  are incorporated in the RFP . Why is this important? Conforming with existing laws and regulations ensures  compliance; incorporating codes of practices supports  the standardization of norms; and surveying the relevant  rules enables better policy-making in a dynamic innovation  technology ecosystem. a. Conduct a review of relevant legislation, rights,  administrative rules and other relevant norms that  govern the types of data and kinds of applications in  scope for the project.  –Conduct a review of relevant legislation, human and  civil rights, administrative rules, and other relevant  norms that govern the types of data and kinds  of applications connected to the problem being  addressed and solutions being proposed. Clarify  the appropriate adjudicative and administrative  jurisdictions within the domestic government in relation to conflicts of laws concerning the data. Depending  on the problem being addressed in the invitation to  tender, existing laws and regulations relevant to that  government function may already have some rules on  the use, processing, transfer etc. of data. Incorporate  those rules and norms into the RFP by referring to the  originating laws and regulations.  –When identifying the relevant rules, sources should  include not only formal law, but also industry best  practices, trade organization consensus guidelines and  other forms of norm-setting mechanisms of soft law.  For example, freedom of information laws2 establish  rules about what needs to be made available to the  public, and data ethics frameworks guide the design  of appropriate data use in government and the wider  public sector. b. Take into consideration the appropriate confidentiality,  trade secret protection and data privacy best practices  that may be relevant to the deployment of the AI  solutions.  –To meaningfully evaluate proposed AI solutions,  government officials must strike the right balance  between preserving accountability through transparency  and reassuring vendors that the trade secrets associated  with their products and services, as well as their  business confidentiality, will not be compromised.  Information about government processes should be  open by default, with the limits of disclosure justified  in exceptional circumstances such as export controls,  national security or ongoing criminal investigations.  –In those circumstances where confidentiality and tradesecrecy protection can be justified in light of public-interest  considerations, investigate the possibilities of facilitating  transparency through partial disclosure, limited review  options and other means of enhancing public trust.     5. Articulate the technical feasibility and  governance considerations of obtaining  relevant data. Why is this important?  Availability of relevant data is a prerequisite for any AI  solution, so time should not be spent discussing AI  procurement if no data will be available. In addition, access  to data should be granted only after careful consideration by  the data-governing party(ies). a. Ensure that you have proper data-governance mechanisms  in place from the start of the procurement process.  –Set out a data-governance approach from the start of  the procurement process. Given the importance and  complexity of data governance, it is almost mandatory  to implement sound data-governance processes before  engaging in transformative AI projects. Governance  needs to cover all data activities related to the proposed  project, such as granting data access to project  members, moving/storing data in other locations for  analysis, and reviewing data consent (the purposes for  which we are authorized to use the data). 
11 Guidelines for AI ProcurementKnowledge and insights (AI) strategic objectives Regulation and inter nal policiesPrinciplesSimplify Standardize Automate EmpowerObjectives Improve understandingEnable discoverability Establish trust Simplify access Ensur e complianceBusiness prioritiesData-driven policy design Citizen/client 360Service optimization Operations efﬁciencyCapabilities and building blocks People and services Metrics and KPIs Workﬂow management Metadata management Privacy and data risk management  Operating model Building blocksChange  mgmt.Domain supportTalent mgmt. Data  catalogueData  quality/issue mgmt.Policy mgmt.Master/  reference data mgmt.Access  and  compliance mgmt.AI and  analytics  model  mgmt.Two-way communication (e.g. outcome/determination, explanation, questions,  challenges) ProcessesPolicyData PolicyData One-waycommunication (outcome/determination)Sample data governance framework Deloitte’s data governance framework enables organizations to be specific in terms of what goals will be prioritized, what capabilities will be deployed and what results are expected
12 Guidelines for AI Procurement –Data governance, and all other aspects of an AI initiative,  require a multidisciplinary team. Refer to Guideline 7 for  more information on multidisciplinary teams.  –In the absence of a data-governance framework, ensure  that it is clear who is accountable (who is responsible for  data management during the procurement process and  the subsequent project). b. Assess whether relevant data will be available for   the project.    –Data is crucial for modern-day AI tools. You should  determine, at a high level, data availability before starting  your procurement process. This entails developing  an understanding of what data might be required for  the project. The idea is not to assess all possible data  sources, but to build general awareness of data sources  of potential interest. Data documentation, using data  dictionaries, for example, is helpful when trying to build a  high-level understanding of data assets.   –In cases where data is not available for the use case in  mind, you may be able to find data through third parties,  for example, vendors, partners or data brokers. If data  is not available through any channel, engage skilled  data scientists (for example, through vendors) to assess  whether the use case can be addressed at all in a datadriven manner.   c. Define if and how you will share data with the vendor(s) for  the procurement initiative and the subsequent project.  –Depending on the sensitivity of your project and  data, it is worth considering the release of data to  providers during procurement so that bidders can craft  a response to the RFP that is tailored to your needs,  with assumptions, timelines and fees that match your  situation as closely as possible. This improves the  quality of RFP responses you receive.  –If you are releasing data that is sensitive and not meant for  public consumption, consider releasing only a sample, so  that vendors have a clear idea of what the data enables  them to do without having access to all of it. When  doing this, make sure that you provide a sample that is  representative of the overall dataset. Otherwise, vendors  might make erroneous assumptions that can impact the  quality of bids and consequently the integrity of the project.  –Create and document the appropriate data-sharing  conditions. For example:    –Minimum requirements for the environment where the  vendor will host the data (e.g. enterprise laptop that  meets the vendor’s standards for their sensitive data).  –Data consent form signed by the vendor’s lead for the  project, stating that the data will be used exclusively for  the pursuit and for no other purpose. It should be clear  to vendors that while in possession of the data they are  not allowed to use the data for any purpose other than  that specified in the RFP .  –Date for data deletion (e.g. immediately upon  submission of the vendor’s RFP response). In no  circumstances should governments allow vendors to  keep data after the procurement process, or after the  conclusion of the project for successful bidders. –Confirmation of deletion of all data (e.g. written  confirmation of deletion signed and submitted by the  vendor’s lead for the project).    –There are many anonymization techniques to help  safeguard data privacy, including data aggregation,  masking and synthetic data.3 Keep in mind, however, that  you must manage anonymized data as carefully as the  original data, since it may inadvertently expose important  insights. RFPs should encourage innovative technological  approaches, such as those mentioned above, that make  less intrusive use of data or that achieve the same or  similar outcomes with less sensitive datasets.  –Certain vendors may have data that is complementary to  the initiative, and it is in your best interest to consider using  this data. It is important to have a framework that gives  guidance regarding the circumstances under which it is  reasonable to accept data from a vendor. Decision criteria  could include:  –Vendor: some vendors could be pre-qualified as  accepted data providers, be considered more  trustworthy as a result of their previous track record as  existing suppliers or have a strong reputation related to  their data assets.  –Domain: some domains – such as health, justice and  immigration – are very sensitive. Use of third-party data  in these domains requires careful scrutiny before it is  accepted.   –Data precedence and integrity: before using any  third-party data, the government should have a clear  understanding of how the data was collected, the  governance processes employed to ensure its integrity,  and whether the third party offering the data is legally  allowed to commercialize it for the RFP .     6. Highlight the technical and ethical limitations  of using the data to avoid issues such as bias.   Why is this important?  Though available, legal to use and proportionate to need,  there may be limitations to data (e.g. data bias) that make an  AI approach inappropriate, unreliable or misleading.   a. Consider the susceptibility of data that could be in scope  and whether usage of the data is fair.    –As important as data protection is, not all data is sensitive  (e.g. open-government data is freely accessible online). All  data, sensitive or not, must have its integrity safeguarded,  but it is not necessary to keep non-sensitive data behind  closed doors. It is important to assess the privacy needs of  different datasets to determine the right level of protection.  Normally, personally identifiable information (PII), such as  financial and health data, is considered extremely sensitive.  The RFP needs to reflect data governance requirements  for both the procurement process and the project that are  in accordance with the nature of the data.  –Select data that fits criteria of fairness. For example, the  data should be representative of the population that the AI  solution will address, as well as being reasonably recent.4
13 Guidelines for AI Procurementb. Highlight known limitations of the data (e.g. quality)  in your RFP and require tenderers to describe their  strategies on how to address these shortcomings.  Have a plan for addressing relevant limitations that you  may have missed.  –Considerations when deciding if a source of data is  suitable include:5  –Representativeness (whether the data accurately  represents the segment of the population in scope  for the AI solution)  –Provenance (including how and why the data was  collected)  –Gaps in data quality (e.g. many values missing from  a particular data element)  –Bias present in the data (if it is not representative  of the population to which the algorithm will be  applied)  –Lack of clarity in metadata (for example, confusing  or vague data element names)  –Check data completeness, representativeness  and accuracy of potential sources before starting  the procurement process. Articulate data quality  observations and the apparent limitations and, if  possible, share those insights through the RFP .  Bidders must be aware of these data considerations  during the procurement process or, in cases where  data is sensitive, the selected provider(s) must be  made aware after the contract has been awarded.  –If you do not have the right skills or means to  comprehensively check for possible limitations of  your data, provide vendors with guiding insights into  the high-level state of the data and its origin,6 so  that they can draft adequate proposals. Also, ensure  the RFP’s data requirements include performing  a comprehensive data quality assessment and, if  required, development of mitigation strategies for lowquality data.     7. Work with a diverse, multidisciplinary  team. Why is this important?  Developing and fulfilling a proper AI RFP will require  a diverse team that understands the interdependent  disciplines that AI covers, including: domain expertise  (e.g. healthcare, transportation), systems and data  engineering, model development (e.g. deep learning) and  visualization/information design, among others.  a. Develop ideas and make decisions throughout the  procurement process in a diverse and multidisciplinary  team.   –Develop an understanding of the skills that are needed  to effectively acquire and maintain an AI-powered  solution, before starting the procurement process.   –Assemble multidisciplinary teams that specialize in  designing, procuring and operationalizing AI systems.  These multidisciplinary teams should include expertise in: policy from the domain (e.g. justice) in which the  AI solution will be applied, machine learning/data  science, data engineering, technology (software and  hardware), procurement, ethics and human rights.7   –Ensure that you have a diverse team. This should include  people from different genders, ethnicities, socioeconomic  backgrounds, disabilities and sexualities. You should also  make sure that there is a mix of perspectives and points  of view. This ensures that problems and solutions are  tackled from different angles and helps to mitigate bias.  –If expertise is lacking within your team, you can reach  out to pools or professional networks within your  organization or across the civil service.  Note that many value-laden decisions will likely be made  during development (i.e. post-procurement), and it is  essential that your team maintains the skills, or at the  very least access to expertise, to ensure that all important  decisions and trade-offs are made or overseen internally,  rather than exclusively by a contractor or vendor. b. Require the successful bidder(s) to assemble a team with  the right skill set.  –As part of your requirements, ensure bidders provide  evidence of the skills and qualifications of the proposed  project resources who will develop and deploy the AI  solution.8 This should be part of the RFP response and it  should be one of your decision criteria when evaluating  the proposals.     8. Focus throughout the procurement  process on mechanisms of accountability  and transparency norms . Why is this important? To build public trust in the legitimacy of the AI system,  the procurement process should enable accountability in  understanding how the AI solution works, so that it can  be evaluated independently and thus promote a culture of  responsibility over the AI solution life cycle.   a. Promote a culture of accountability across   AI-powered solutions.   –Public institutions cannot rely on black-box  algorithms to justify decisions that affect individual  and collective citizens’ rights, especially with the  increased understanding about algorithmic bias and its  discriminatory effects on access to public resources.  There will be different considerations depending on the  use case and application of AI that you are aiming to  acquire, and you should plan to work with the supplier to  explain the application for external scrutiny, ensuring your  approach can be held to account. These considerations  should link to the risk and impact assessment described  in Guideline 2. Under certain scenarios, you could  consider making it a requirement for providers to allow  independent audit(s) of their solutions. This can help  prevent or mitigate unintended outcomes. 
14 Guidelines for AI Procurement –Providers and public officials should incorporate risk  analysis for the unexpected and unintended effects of  AI-powered solutions, within the limits prescribed by  the law, and specify their respective responsibilities  in the contract. Note that the laws and standards  for assigning accountability may differ according  to jurisdiction. For example, the Canadian federal  government’s Directive on Automated Decision-Making  requires the associate deputy minister of the respective  federal entity to sign off on an algorithmic impact  assessment (AIA) as part of an AI project.  –Consider how applicable accountability requirements in  law, such as freedom of information legislation and dataprotection logging requirements, will be implemented  throughout the project life cycle. b. Ensure that AI decision-making is as transparent   as possible.  –Encourage transparency of AI decision-making (i.e. the  decisions and/or insights generated by AI). One way to do  this is to encourage the use of explainable AI. You can also  make it a requirement for the bidder to provide the required  training and knowledge transfer to your team, even making  your team part of the AI-implementation journey. Finally, you  can ask for documentation that provides information about  the algorithm (e.g. data used for training, whether the model  is based on supervised, unsupervised or reinforcement  learning, or any known biases). In a traditional model where a service provider interfaces with the service recipient, the recipient can communicate back  and forth with the service provider regarding an outcome and/or determination. The recipient can ask questions regarding a  decision and challenge an outcome.Diagram to explain what is meant by a ‘black box’ algorithm and why they’re an issue With a fully automated system that uses a technique such as neural networks, the service recipient cannot expect to  understand the outcome. This is because certain algorithms, such as neural networks, are very accurate but do not explain  their path to a decision.   –Documentation is especially important when the  algorithm is a pre-packaged solution that the bidder will  bring to the project, as opposed to an algorithm that  will be built and/or customized as part of the upcoming  project. Finally, you can also ask bidders to provide  information on their model-building methodology,  including how they select variables, build samples (where  applicable) and validate the model. Be aware, however,  that algorithm-building is an iterative process and that it  depends on creativity as much as it does on science.   –Documentation provided by a bidder will give you  directional awareness of their practices and methods; it  will not give you a step-by-step guide that details exactly  what would be done during the project, as the exact  process will invariably shift from project to project to  meet the needs of each scenario. c. Explore mechanisms to enable interpretability of the  algorithms internally and externally as a means of  establishing accountability and contestability.  –With AI solutions that make decisions affecting people’s  rights and benefits, it is less important to know exactly  how a machine-learning model has arrived at a result if  we can show logical steps to achieving the outcome. In  other words, the ability to know how and why a model  performed in the way it did is a more appropriate means  of evaluating transparency in the context of AI. For  example, this might include what training data was used, Knowledge and insights (AI) strategic objectives Regulation and inter nal policiesPrinciples Simplify Standar dize Automate EmpowerObjectives Improve understandingEnable discoverability Establish trust Simplify access Ensur e complianceBusiness priorities Data-driven  policy design Citizen/client 360 Service optimization Operations ef ﬁciencyCapabilities and building blocks People and services Metrics and KPIs Workﬂow management Metadata management Privacy and data risk management  Operating model Building blocksChange  mgmt.Domain supportTalent mgmt. Data  catalogueData  quality/issue mgmt.Policy mgmt.Master/  reference data mgmt.Access  and  compliance mgmt.AI and  analytics  model  mgmt.Two-way communication (e.g. outcome/determination, explanation, questions,  challenges) ProcessesPolicyData PolicyData One-waycommunication (outcome/determination)Knowledge and insights (AI) strategic objectives Regulation and inter nal policiesPrinciples Simplify Standar dize Automate EmpowerObjectives Improve understandingEnable discoverability Establish trust Simplify access Ensur e complianceBusiness priorities Data-driven  policy design Citizen/client 360 Service optimization Operations ef ﬁciencyCapabilities and building blocks People and services Metrics and KPIs Workﬂow management Metadata management Privacy and data risk management  Operating model Building blocksChange  mgmt.Domain supportTalent mgmt. Data  catalogueData  quality/issue mgmt.Policy mgmt.Master/  reference data mgmt.Access  and  compliance mgmt.AI and  analytics  model  mgmt.Two-way communication (e.g. outcome/determination, explanation, questions,  challenges) ProcessesPolicyData PolicyData One-waycommunication (outcome/determination)
15 Guidelines for AI Procurementwhich variables have contributed most to a result, and  the types of audit and assurance the model went through  in relation to systemic issues such as discrimination  and fairness. This should be set out as documentation  needed by your supplier.  –It is also important to consider the potential tension  between explainability and accuracy of AI when acquiring  AI solutions. Classic statistical techniques such as  decision-tree models are easier to explain but might have  less predictive power, whereas more complex models,  such as neural networks, have high predictive power  but are considered to be black boxes. Given these  challenges you should think carefully about achieving the  right balance between accuracy and transparency in the  AI-powered solution procured, especially for topics of  great social concern (e.g. healthcare, education) where  citizens might expect full transparency. Address this  concern in the RFP .  –If an algorithm will be making decisions that affect  people’s rights and public benefits, describe how the  administrative process would preserve due process by  enabling the contestability of automated decision-making  in those circumstances.   9. Implement a process for the continued  engagement of the AI provider with the  acquiring entity for knowledge transfer and  long-term risk assessment. Why is this important? The functionality and consequences of AI systems may not  be apparent in the procurement process and often become  evident only over the duration of its application, requiring  extended communication and information-sharing between  the procuring entity and the system developer. For AI systems in the public sector, sustainable and ongoing  evaluation methods and means of providing feedback on  the data model are crucial to ensure that the tool’s use  remains ethical. You should make clear in your RFP that this  should be considered by the provider and discussed as part  of the procurement process.   a. Consider during the procurement process that acquiring  a tool that includes AI is not a one-time decision; testing  the application over its lifespan is crucial.  –The tool will need support during its life cycle. Knowing  where to go for that support and how much support is  available will be vital for getting the most out of any tool.  Accepting the potential impact of any support gaps or  employing outside expertise both come at a cost. This  should be factored in when purchasing an intelligent tool.  –Consider the implementation of a process-based  governance framework that provides a template for  the integration of the norms, values and principles that  inform the procedures and protocols organizing the  project workflow.  –Testing the model on an ongoing basis is necessary to  maintain its accuracy. An inaccurate model can result in  erroneous decisions and affect users of public services. Therefore, you should establish with the provider how the  efficacy of the model will be monitored once deployed. b. Ask the AI provider for knowledge transfer and training to  be part of the engagement.  –Make knowledge transfer a requirement under the RFP .  Evaluate the thoroughness and logic of the knowledgetransfer plan to ensure that government resources will be  able to use the tool appropriately on their own once the  project is finalized.  –Set out clearly your expectations for project  documentation. Ensure that maintenance and auditing of  the AI solution would be possible by entities independent  of the vendor. c. Ask the AI provider for insights on how to manage the  appropriate use of the application by non-specialists.    –Operational or service staff must have enough  knowledge or training on the solution to understand  how to use it and successfully exploit its outputs.  You should address the need for enough training and  support to avoid the misuse of AI applications with the  AI provider. The application must make it easy to report  any suspected unauthorized behaviour to the relevant  authority(ies) within and/or outside the organization.  Enable end-to-end auditability with a process log that  gathers the data across the modelling, training, testing,  verifying and implementation phases of the project life  cycle. Such a log will allow for the variable accessibility  and presentation of information with different users in  mind to achieve interpretable and justifiable AI.   d. Make ethical considerations part of your evaluation  criteria for proposals.  –There are robust ethical practices that you should require  suppliers to demonstrate when providing AI solutions.  Leading AI-solution providers have begun to create  internal frameworks for the ethical design, development  and deployment of AI, which cover processes to ensure  accountability over algorithms, avoiding outputs of  analysis that could result in unfair and/or biased decisionmaking, designing for reproducibility, testing the model  under a range of conditions and defining acceptable  model performance. Bidders should be able not only to  describe their approach to the above, but also to provide  examples of projects, complete with client references,  where these considerations have been followed.9  –Make comprehensive, transparent algorithm assessment  one of the requirements in the proposal and, if  applicable, state minimum performance metrics that  the model must meet. If possible, work with bidders to  determine what the thresholds should be. As part of  testing the model, you should work with the provider  to establish how often you need to update the model  with new data. Testing over the lifespan of the model for  suitability and accuracy is highly important, especially  when the AI is supporting critical services.  
16 Guidelines for AI Procurement10. Create the conditions for a level and fair  playing field among AI solution providers.   Why is this important?  Government spending can be used to create a fair,  competitive market, which leads to better AI systems.  In addition, early engagement with AI vendors can result  in more relevant responses, increasing the probability of  success for the procurement and the subsequent project. a. Reach out in various ways to a wide variety of AI solution  providers.    –Given the rapidly developing landscape of AI service  providers, largely comprising smaller enterprises such  as start-ups, consider non-traditional methods of  market engagement to attract AI solution providers. For  example, explain the needs that lead to the proposal  through in-person presentations, webinars, information  sessions at co-working spaces and/or online platforms  such as LinkedIn or Twitter.  –Consider reaching out to non-traditional stakeholders,  such as research institutes and academia. In some  cases, these may have the right skills to be part of an AI  implementation, and in all cases, they can act   as advisers.10   –Keep in mind that successfully designing and deploying  AI in organizations as big and complex as public  agencies requires much more than technical expertise.  It requires experience in change management, familiarity  with public organizations, and the ability to manage  complex projects.   b. Engage vendors early and frequently throughout the  process.    –Market engagement is a process; it takes place prior to  procurement and aims to identify potential bidders and/ or solutions, build capacity in the market to address  challenges and opportunities, and inform the design of  the procurement and contract.  –Early engagement between government and industry  is vital to a successful AI purchasing campaign. Early  supplier engagement can help to determine the  scope and feasibility of the RFP and, in turn, the most  appropriate way to design and structure the requirements,  increasing the likelihood that the winning bidder will  meet your needs at a competitive cost. Ways to engage  vendors early include having vendors provide inputs  on possible evaluation criteria for the RFP , and hosting  vendors to walk them through the RFP . Approaches like  this are already being deployed in Canada, for example,  and greatly help government and the private sector  increase the effectiveness of procurement.  –To mitigate any risks that could be associated with  market engagement (e.g. commercial confidentially,  protection of intellectual property [IP], fettering  discretion of tender process), be sure to broadly  advertise the engagement opportunity, allow all  interested parties to participate, ensure that there is  adequate time for responses and reasonable time for  bidder selection and, where appropriate, that RFP  responses can be marked as confidential.  c. Ensure interoperability of AI solutions and require open  licensing terms to avoid vendor lock-in.    –Consider strategies to avoid vendor lock-in, particularly  in relation to black-box algorithms. These practices could  involve the use of open standards, royalty-free licensing  and public domain publication terms.  –During the design and deployment of the AI solution, it  is likely that either a new algorithm will be designed, or  an existing one will be tailored (e.g. retrained through  your data). It is therefore useful to consider whether your  department should own that IP and how it would control  it. The arrangements should be mutually beneficial and  fair, and require royalty-free licensing when adopting a  system that includes IP controlled by a vendor.  –In order to preserve access to systems that become  obsolete, ensure the ability to reverse-engineer the  system to allow for maintenance of the AI solution  independent of the vendor. 
17 Guidelines for AI ProcurementEndnotes 1. Definition from the Engineering and Physical Science Research Council, a UK government research funding body. 2.  For an up-to-date list of freedom of information laws around the world, see https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Freedom_of_ information_laws_by_country  (link as of 6 September 2019). 3. For more information on data anonymization, refer to: “Guide to basic data anonymisation techniques”, Personal Data  Protection Commission, Singapore. 25 January 2018. 4. For more information on fairness during data selection, refer to: “Understanding artificial intelligence ethics and safety. A  guide for the responsible design and implementation of AI systems in the public sector”, section “Data fairness”, David  Leslie, the Alan Turing Institute. 5. For more information on data selection criteria, refer to: “Understanding artificial intelligence ethics and safety. A guide  for the responsible design and implementation of AI systems in the public sector”, section “Data fairness”, David Leslie,  the Alan Turing Institute. 6. For example, summary statistics such as number of rows present, number of missing values for each data field,  description of how the data is collected and processed. 7. For more information on the domain and technical skills required to deliver an AI engagement, refer to: “Searching for  superstars isn’t the answer. How organizations can build world-class analytics teams that deliver results”, Deloitte.  8. ibid. 9. AI ethics is a deep and evolving field, and there are various publications on the matter, including those listed below.  Refer to these sources for a full background on the topic.  –“OECD principles on artificial intelligence”, Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development  –“Ethics guidelines for trustworthy AI”, Independent High-Level Expert Group on Artificial Intelligence set up by the  European Commission  –“Understanding artificial intelligence ethics and safety. A guide for the responsible design and implementation of AI  systems in the public sector”, section “Data fairness”, David Leslie, the Alan Turing Institute.  –“For a meaningful artificial intelligence. Towards a French and European strategy”, Cédric Villani 10.  Examples of organizations include the Alan Turing Institute in the UK and the Vector Institute, MILA, and the Alberta  Machine Intelligence Institute in Canada. 
World Economic Forum 91–93 route de la Capite CH-1223 Cologny/Geneva Switzerland   Tel.:  +41 (0) 22 869 1212 Fax: +41 (0) 22 786 2744 contact@weforum.org www.weforum.orgThe World Economic Forum,  committed to improving   the state of the world, is the  International Organization for  Public-Private Cooperation.   The Forum engages the  foremost political, business   and other leaders of society   to shape global, regional  and industry agendas.
