Regulatory Technology  for the 21st Century WHITE PAPER MARCH 2022In collaboration with the Global Future Council on Agile Governance
Contents Cover: @gremlin/ Gettyimages RegTech defined 1 The value of RegTech 2 RegTech case studies  Case study Suade Labs: FIRE Case study General Motors: IBM’s OpenPages with Watson Case study Novo Hamburgo (Brazil): Supporting SMEs Case study Colombia: Ecosystem for Smart Regulation Case study Xalgorithms: Oughmation 3 Common success factors 3.1 Engagement 3.2 Design 3.3 Applications 4 RegTech roadmaps 4.1 Find your entry point 4.2 Find your opportunity areas 4.3 Choose the technology 4.4 Experiment with RegTech applications 4.5 Prioritize the RegTech applications 5 Final remarks  Contributors Acknowledgements3 5 7 13 16 22 23 23 Disclaimer  This document is published by the World  Economic Forum as a contribution to a  project, insight area or interaction. The  findings, interpretations and conclusions  expressed herein are a result of a  collaborative process facilitated and  endorsed by the World Economic Forum  but whose results do not necessarily  represent the views of the World Economic  Forum, nor the entirety of its Members,  Partners or other stakeholders. © 2022 World Economic Forum. All rights  reserved. No part of this publication may  be reproduced or transmitted in any form  or by any means, including photocopying  and recording, or by any information  storage and retrieval system. Regulatory Technology for the 21st Century 2
RegTech defined Regulation is central to governmental management  of complex systems. It is routinely used by  governments to increase market efficiency, ensure  actors’ accountability and support coordination  across activities. However, if designed or applied  ineffectively, regulation may trigger significant  losses, impose unnecessary financial burdens and  stifle innovation.  Emerging technologies have challenged  governments’ ability to regulate the Fourth Industrial  Revolution. On the one hand, there is a need  to minimize or eliminate technological risk. On  the other hand, there is a desire to optimize the  potential benefits of new technologies.As a consequence, governments have shifted from  traditional set-and-forget regulations to iterative  and user-centred design practices, including  experimental regulation (prototyping and testing)  and outcome-based regulation. This new approach  of agile governance has changed policy-making  and promoted technological advancement,  providing many opportunities to design new  regulatory tools and enhance the regulatory  process through RegTech. For example, artificial  intelligence (AI) can be used to monitor data for  regulatory risks, natural-language processing can  help organizations better understand regulatory  requirements, and blockchain can help track and  verify compliance data. What is regulatory technology? Reflecting Society: The State of Diverse Representation in Media and Entertainment 3 Below: @ Lan Zhang/ Gettyimages Regulatory Technology for the 21st Century 3
Collaboration among all stakeholders and the use of RegTech can facilitate better regulation, governance  and compliance. Technological advancements have reached satisfactory maturity and a high level of  community understanding. Therefore, such technologies can be confidently applied to improve efficiency. 21st century The 21st century poses new challenges as regulatory systems struggle to keep up with the risks  and opportunities of emerging technologies. It is important to recognize the challenges of balancing  the need to innovate and the duty to protect and build trust among stakeholders.  Often, law and bureaucracy are hard to reconcile with technological change. As a result, regulation  can hinder new ideas, products and business models. Industries and corporations in different verticals  struggle with ambiguous, static or non-existent regulatory frameworks. Moreover, technologies  transcend traditional industry definitions, straddling sectors and jurisdictions.  Post-COVID-19 During the COVID-19 pandemic, economic conditions have required agile governance and  technology deployment. Regulators and regulated industries have revealed a need for more agile and  responsive regulation when faced with social, economic and political disruptions.  In a world of increasing regulation and growing environmental, ethical and social needs, minimizing the  burden of compliance is crucial to successful regulation and governance. Policy-making should therefore  be rapid while maintaining operational functionality and social stability.Why now? –First, the definition recognizes an increasing need for transparency and flexibility in modern  regulatory practices. RegTech aims to simplify regulation and streamline compliance processes  by translating complex regulation into code. This can reduce associated risks and costs  while harmonizing stakeholders’ viewpoints. Legacy regulatory systems tend not to promote  transparency and agility but new technologies can counter this opaque processes.  –Second, there is an interdependency between regulators and the regulated. Focusing on one  stakeholder at a time will not improve current systems. RegTech is a utility for the whole industry  that reduces the burden of compliance for the regulated, but also promotes effective governance  from regulators.For the purposes of this paper, RegTech is defined as:  The application of various new technological solutions  that assist highly regulated industry stakeholders,  including regulators, in setting, effectuating  and meeting regulatory governance, reporting,  compliance and risk management obligations. The goal of RegTech is to prioritize and improve the  effectiveness of regulations and governance while  reducing the cost of compliance through modern technology. Solutions like codified-regulations,  AI compliance systems, blockchain tracking and  smart contracting all present potential to improve  regulatory systems.  The question remains: how to best adopt  transformative new RegTech applications –  moving from static to dynamic regulation – while  keeping regulation and governance true to their  main objectives. Definition Why this definition? Regulatory Technology for the 21st Century 4
The value of RegTech1 Regulatory technologies support the shift  from ‘reactive’ to ‘dynamic’ regulation  – enabling regulatory formation and  compliance to more effectively evolve with  changing market dynamics.  Below: @ martin-dm/ Gettyimages Regulatory Technology for the 21st Century 5
Regulatory frameworks are often a response to  market failures in a static model. They are frequently  applied after recessions to avoid the recurrence of  past system weaknesses. This ‘reactive’ nature can  make compliance complicated and costly.   Highly regulated industries can find in RegTech a  relief from such burdens, hence freeing financial  and social capital for reinvestment. Effective  RegTech deployment builds greater capacity to  pre-empt changes in regulated markets, simplifies  complex systems and quickly updates based on  regulatory change. However, greater potential return  comes from the adoption of RegTech and agile  governance together. This increases the system  flexibility to adjust underlying regulatory measures as  opposed to overhauling or creating new processes.  Likewise, RegTech can make regulatory systems  more resilient to disruption. Many modern  businesses have been able to disrupt markets not  from fundamental innovation, but by discovering a  loophole that allows them to ignore the compliance  burdens of the incumbent competitors. Discovery  of these loopholes can highlight ingrained  inefficiencies driven by legacy or over-regulation, and in fact increase consumer welfare. However,  it also exposes threats to market competition, and  labour and consumer protection that regulators  struggle to manage. RegTech enables a  regulatory system to continuously evaluate and  update when such loopholes are identified. For  example, it makes it easier to adjust processes  to reduce regulatory burdens on incumbents, or  enforce required market, labour and consumer  protections on new entrants.   The concern in employing this “agile” approach  is that it can result in a high level of regulatory  uncertainty for business. An agile regulation  model that employs continuous integration and  delivery of regulations may increase the risk  of long-term business investments. However,  insights from other fields (see Box 1), suggest that  agile approaches can support competition and  encourage true innovation.  The rest of this paper provides case studies  and best practices to support meaningful  dialogue among regulated industries, regulators  and technology innovators for the successful  deployment of RegTech. Parallels of agile governance and agile software BOX 1 In the 1990s, the agile approach was introduced to software development and began to displace  traditional “waterfall” monolithic development methodologies. The method was driven by evolving  business needs that were not met by existing communication and project development strategies. Many  software projects were cancelled before completion because the design process was not structured to  allow for products to adapt to changing consumer preferences over time.  What emerged was a focus on iteration and dynamism to continuously evaluate the operational state  of an application while in deployment. This was to ensure client interaction was prioritized and that  individual interactions were valued in final specifications. The result was faster access to new software,  with more rapid feedback to developers, allowing for software to be adjusted while in development.  Proper infrastructure, well-defined interfaces and efficient automated processes have been the key for  development objectives to be met despite continuous change. Regulatory Technology for the 21st Century 6
RegTech case studies2 Through a series of RegTech use cases  from a diverse group of industries and  market segments, the opportunities and  challenges to successful deployment of  RegTech can be revealed.  Each case reveals insights into how RegTech can  be applied and informs a set of principles to guide  new technologies’ application for regulation. The goal is to encourage governments and industries to  implement RegTech and grow confidence in how  and when it can be adopted.Below: @Tero Vesalainen/ Gettyimages Regulatory Technology for the 21st Century 7
Suade Labs’ FIRE, a standardized financial regulatory data framework, streamlined reporting processes and  made their data standard open source.  The financial industry lacks a common data standard for financial regulatory information while the  compliance burden on the industry continues to increase. Suade Labs (with initial funding from the  European Commission) After the 2008 financial crisis, significant regulatory reforms were imposed on the financial industry,  increasing the compliance burden on the industry. Suade Labs developed an open-source data standard  called FIRE, short for financial regulation. FIRE is an intuitively designed data standard for financial regulatory  information that is available open source for all to use and contribute to. Expanding the FIRE data standard to cater for new regulatory reporting requirements and jurisdictions  requires sufficient expertise in financial regulation, data management, risk management, financial markets  and coding.  –JSON programming language was used to enable a low barrier to entry.  –GitHub was used for data storage and to enable stakeholders to view or contribute openly.  –FIRE creates high-quality data that allows natural language processing and machine learning tools to  function in the regulatory reporting process. FIRE facilitates regulatory reporting in financial services. It helps central banks and regulators evaluate data  submitted from institutions by standardizing the data to facilitate regulatory reporting and compliance tasks.  It helps financial institutions by streamlining the reporting process and making reporting more efficient.Who What Challenges Technical elements Impact RegTech tools should focus on adopting scalable standards to allow for increased efficiency, transparency  and automation. RegTech works well when it is mutually beneficial and when there is buy-in from regulators themselves. FIRE  benefits both financial industry players that implement it (through increased efficiency and automation) as  well as regulators that regulate them (through transparency and improved financial stability). Open-source standards (rather than proprietary ones or bespoke solutions) bring many benefits; for  example, quality assurance, cost effectiveness and adaptability (and subsequently no lock in to a particular  vendor). FIRE has been made available to the financial services industry as a public utility. It can be used by  anyone, independently of Suade Labs’ reporting solution, and anyone with suitable expertise can contribute  to and expand the data standard.Scalable standards Mutually beneficial  Open source Suade Labs: FIRE Case study Problem Action InsightsA B C Regulatory Technology for the 21st Century 8
General Motors used IBM’s OpenPages with the Watson platform to consolidate auditing data and processes  for better risk management.  Risk management in the automobile industry requires an integrated system that can monitor, measure and  mitigate risks from across the entire business. IBM, General Motors Automobile manufacturers have to confront a wide variety of risks in their daily operations – from natural  disasters and cyberattacks, to supply chain disruptions and changes to regulations. As a result, risk  monitoring and mitigation is an important component of the manufacturer’s day-to-day considerations.  General Motors recognized that its existing systems and processes were not integrated and therefore not  optimizing risk mitigation. General Motors opted to consolidate their various risk management processes  and procedures using IBM’s OpenPages with the Watson platform. Building trust in an external (as opposed to in-house) technology management solution was overcome with  a strong focus on stakeholder buy-in. OpenPages with the Watson platform General Motor’s Audit, Risk and Control departments now benefit from a shared approach to their  interpretation of the company’s broader structure and processes. It became easier to understand potential  risks and investigate and resolve risk profiles that affect different departments. It drove operational efficiency  and more effective sorting of relevant information as well as saving considerable costs on IT maintenance. Integration and standardization allow for increased transparency across risk profiles of the business. Cross departmental data sharing practices and storing data on a single platform enables more meaningful  analysis and improved business insights to be provided. RegTech adopters should focus on early stage planning and buy-in from internal stakeholders, training  users early to allow users to take control of the implementation, and showcasing value and outcome. This  should lead to increased organisational buy-in. IBM and General Motors adopted an agile methodology and used pilot environments to develop and refine  business requirementsGeneral Motors: IBM’s OpenPages with Watson Case study Problem Action InsightsA B CWho What Challenges Technical elements Impact Transparency Data sharing Stakeholder buy-in Agile Regulatory Technology for the 21st Century 9
To increase the ease of establishing a new business, the City of Novo Hamburgo implemented a series of  technological solutions to increase the speed of administrational processes.  The average time to open a new business in Novo Hamburgo was 480 days, leading to stunted local  growth and a breach of trust between the public and private sector. Novo Hamburgo, mayor and local city administration, in partnership with the Municipal Secretariat of  Economic Development, Brazilian Service for the Support of Small and Medium Enterprises (SEBRAE), and  various civil society organizations. The problem made new business formation by small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) unattractive.  Improving administrative processes for SMEs involved de-bureaucratization through the development  and application of a series of evidence-based policies. This was driven by investment in technological  infrastructure, such as geo-referential platforms through satellite access (ArcGIS and SIG), integrating distinct  licensing software and digitalizing processes. It also involved passing new municipal legislation and other  regulatory instruments to diminish bureaucratization and to strengthen the capabilities of city hall employees. Success required a change in mindset and local culture regarding technology-driven decision-making. In  addition, the project was constrained by a reduced budget, especially due to COVID-19 and the trade-off  between investing in economic development and health. This was overcome through an IDB loan.  –ESRI Geospatial Cloud  –METROVERSE  Currently, 70% of the processes for opening a new business are concluded online within an hour. Instilling a relationship of trust between regulators and regulated industry players is a key benefit of RegTech  adoption. Trust can be achieved through transparency (e.g. leveraging data and making evidence-based  policies). Transparency, coupled with communication, is also beneficial when a change of mindset is required. Regulators should act as role models for the adoption of technology. This sets a high standard and  encourages industry players to leverage RegTech and to be agile and innovative in their approach. Regulators should invest in technology upskilling and participate in knowledge-sharing exercises. This use  case benefited from capacity building of the municipal civil servants and cultural transformation. RegTech presents a large benefit for small businesses in particular due to an often-disproportionate  compliance burden experienced by SMEs. This use case benefited from the political will, vision and commitment of those that pushed this change forward.Novo Hamburgo (Brazil): Supporting SMEs Case study Problem Action InsightsA B CWho What Challenges Technical elements Impact Trust Technology adoption Upskilling SMEs Identify TegTech  champions Regulatory Technology for the 21st Century 10
The Colombian government developed a digital transformation roadmap and an ecosystem to support RegTech. The incoming Government in Colombia identified a lack of coordination and guidance to in their digital  transformation agenda that impeded the adoption of technologies, including for regulatory purposes. The Presidency of the Republic of Colombia, Development Bank of Latin America (CAF) and associated teams. The team set out to create policy instruments that would act as a main guideline for the design,  development and implementation of digital transformation, AI initiatives and smart regulation in the country. Information asymmetry existed in the public sector and there was a lack of general knowledge regarding  digital transformation among public officials and other entities involved. The teams involved also faced  competing priorities to allocate resources on health, education and social welfare. Political will from  leadership and access to finance to overcome these challenges.  Not applicable The creation of a Privacy by Design, Default Sandbox for AI Projects and the use of data to draft            smart regulations. Creating trust and confidence in regulators among the private sector is fundamental. Convince regulators that regulation should be based on data, and subsequently leverage data to  understand which areas should be regulated in. These two steps overcome issues such as information  asymmetry within the public sector and promote transparency. This allows for deployment and implementation to be carried out efficiently. Colombia: Ecosystem for Smart Regulation Case study Problem Action InsightsA B CWho What Challenges Technical elements Impact Trust Data/evidence-base  approach Stakeholder buy-in Regulatory Technology for the 21st Century 11
Regulations can be difficult to implement in a technical system, but solutions like Xalgorithms provide  innovative solutions to interpret and comply with these rules.  A need was identified to automate high-precision rules, such as jurisdictional taxation, efficiently. Xalgorithms Applying dynamic ecological constraints (rules) was identified as an effective way to manage/execute  regulatory processes. However, fiscal and regulatory methods were too blunt to be applied at the time.  “Oughtomation” is a general-purpose request-response messaging system under free/libre/open licensing  for use across any digital network.  Balancing the time required to develop interest from diverse individuals and organizations with the need to  focus on system development and documentation presented challenges.  –IPFS or Cassandra  –Rust  –Electron/react  –Diverse data sources Deployment of “Oughtomation” will make it easy for anyone to publish, discover, fetch, scrutinize and prioritize  rules, to be directly read and understood by non-specialized humans and machines, for any purpose, in any  language. It can also lower the costs associated with interactions across commercial systems. Cross-division teams help convert rules into a form that can be discovered and leveraged by individuals  who are not specialized, as well as machines. The ability to use the system across different forms of regulations and systems is important, especially when  navigating a fragmented regulatory framework. Receiving buy-in from regulators and governments to support innovative RegTech initiatives is an  ongoing challenge. Ensuring free/libre/open relationships was identified as a key success factor. Following a set of design principles (i.e. simplicity, intuitiveness, decentralization, modularity, least power,  tabular declarative style) makes a significant impact on the user experience. Additional key success factors included directing the team’s focus to human-centred automation and being  a tolerant brand that is driven by community.Xalgorithms: Oughtomation Problem Action InsightsA B CWho What Challenges Technical elements ImpactCase study Multidisciplinary  teams Interoperability Stakeholder buy-in Open relationship Design principles  Other Regulatory Technology for the 21st Century 12
Common success factors 3 Below: @Leonid Sukala/ Gettyimages Regulatory Technology for the 21st Century 13
When RegTech is viewed as an emergent technology  trend that allows digital innovation to transform  highly regulated industries, one can make a case  for the mechanisms that, in most situations,  make these tools more effective in creating and  meeting regulatory obligations (mechanisms such  as engagement, design and applications). In the  dynamic, less predictable environment of real-world problems, RegTech provides strategic tools to  support standardization, automation and streamlining  of regulatory processes. In times of disruption, like  recent events in the financial system and the global  pandemic, such mechanisms have proven critical  to cutting through red tape and keeping essential  services running while also ensuring that optionality is  maintained until the disruptive period is over. Public-private partnerships 2.0 (PPP 2.0): Radical user centricityStakeholder capitalism-led Champion-driven trustRegTech requires an active evolution of more  traditional collaboration models. It requires  designing with partners rather than for them,  and, in doing so, creating more confidence in  the market as a result of such partnerships. The key is for non-public sector partners, both  businesses and people sector organizations  (where relevant), to be active players in the  work, and not merely passive recipients of public  sector decisions.  Approaching regulation, enforcement and user  adoption through the experience of traditionallyproduct and service centred design thinking,  including standard semantics and reference points  that enable streamlined processes and global policy  coordination. The focus should be on minimizing pain points and enhancing user experiences, not  just on what is efficient or possible from a supply  perspective. Here, the parallels with agile practices  in software development are particularly apt, as the  radical shift emerged when solving users’ problems  was prioritized over comprehensive vision.To ensure equity and shared responsibility across  stakeholders and regulators from top to bottom,  RegTech design and implementation needs to be  grounded in stakeholder capitalism principles –  creating long-term value for all those involved. It is particularly key to secure buy-in from stakeholders  for regulatory principles that may be evolutionary  rather than permanent, so that they can support  and ensure effective operationalisation of these  principles even as they change with the times.  Building comfort with RegTech applications can  be difficult, especially when the general public is  involved. There is a need for clear communication to  reduce information asymmetries and generate buyin to a new system. Including trusted “champions” – such as public officials, senior private leaders  or community activists, who can communicate  RegTech in ways that are accessible to a wide range  of demographics—can be an effective means of  driving adoption at scale. Engagement Design3.1 3.2 Regulatory Technology for the 21st Century 14
Regulation for risk, safety and mitigation DynamicTransition from the “regulate-and-forget’’ to the  “adapt-and-learn” era of regulation to tap into  the broader innovation and creativity space and  not solely focused on safety guardrails. This is particularly critical for the emergent phenomena  handled by RegTech, where existing templates,  standards, benchmarks and ostensible “best  practice” are no longer applicable A regulatory approach that nurtures experimentation,  iteration and prototyping via regulatory sandboxes  and other mechanisms creates an environment that  can better support RegTech integration. Examples of  this are seen in Singapore and UK Financial Conduct  Authority and Arizona fintech sandboxes. However, dynamic does not mean erratic. It is important that  regulatory updates are consistent, so as to not  undermine the ability for business to make long-term  decisions. The best RegTech balances between the  openness for iterative experiments, and sufficient  structure for reasonably predictable outcomes. Human and machine intelligence Balancing qualitative (human) and quantitative  (machine) insights will lead to policy decisions  informed by multiple and varied data sets and  create more predictive mechanisms to ensure  that policy-making stays in front of cultural  change. Increased investments in AI, analytics  and general digitization (e.g. hybrid cloud adoption to drive process automation) will help  create a preferable future with a more frictionless  path for implementing RegTech compliance  solutions. These investments should include  sufficient space for the underlying algorithms  themselves to evolve in order to accommodate  dynamic technological shifts. Applications 3.3 Regulatory Technology for the 21st Century 15
RegTech roadmap4 In employing RegTech, regulated industries  and involved stakeholders are embracing a  dynamic regulatory environment and taking  the first necessary step towards preparing  for a future of agile governance. In doing so,  regulators and the regulated should not have  to upend or rewrite entire regulatory and  compliance frameworks to begin this journey. Below: @Bertlmann/ Gettyimages Regulatory Technology for the 21st Century 16
There is room for experimenting with RegTech  applications. The most value will be observed by  testing and learning from the application of RegTech  tools. For those compelled to act, this section acts  as a roadmap to start implementing of RegTech.  To encourage further deployment of RegTech,  regulators and the regulated should ask themselves:  –What is my/our entry point into the RegTech  ecosystem? –What are the opportunities to use RegTech?  –What types of RegTech tools and solutions are  applicable?  –How should our institutions apply these  RegTech solutions and who does this involve?  –How should our institutions prioritize these  solutions? Think of RegTech as a stool that stands on three  legs, as illustrated in Figure 1: the platform, users  and tech solution. RegTech stakeholders (e.g.  governments and businesses) are not unique to one  portion of the market. For example, governments who act as the regulator can manage the regulation  platform, they can develop technological solutions  to help interpret regulation and/or they can be  the user of such technology to help them more  efficiently regulate a market. Find your entry point 4.1 Overview of the RegTech ecosystem FIGURE 1 market behaviour Provides the rules for regulatory reviewFeedback to streamline Experiment, develop+ deploy tech solutionsExperiment, develop + deploy tech solutionsregulatory reviewFeedback to streamline machine readible logicOpen-acces APIs,regulatory dataPlatform Tech Solutions UsersTransforms  regulations into  digital logic TH E  R E G U LATED  O R  TH E REGULATORSREGULATION AS A PLATFORM TECH COMPANIES, OR DEVELOPERS WITHIN INDUSTRY AND G O VER N M EN T These are the key points of entry into the RegTech ecosystem  to consider as organizations and governments begin to build in  new regulatory practices.  Regulatory Technology for the 21st Century 17
Regulation as a platform Streamlining the regulatory review process Experiment, develop and deploy solutionsRegulation as a platform is the concept that regulation  can be designed to facilitate regulatory interactions and reporting across an industry or marketplace.                                            The proliferation of digital advancements, such as AI and natural language processing, and big data enable the digitization of regulation, enabling active use of technology in regulatory and compliance processes. The underlying regulatory legislation still informs      the rules for market behaviour. However, regulation as a platform transforms government regulation         into a form of digital logic, or “computable         regulation”, which can be accessed by technology developers through open-access APIs and turned into RegTech applications. Regulatory frameworks can be riddled with accumulation and accretion of legislation. RegTech creates a constant feedback loop between the RegTech users, developers and regulation itself to streamline the regulatory review process. The deployment of RegTech makes it easier to identify and eliminate redundant rules and regulations, sometimes automatically if the right data privacy structures are in place. This feedback loop creates a system of continual improvement, rather than commissioning systematic reviews that can be costly and years apart. Experimentation between the developers and users is critical to growing RegTech applications. As an evolving industry, new innovations will be encouraged by prioritising mechanisms of experimentation such as regulatory sandboxes and the use of foresight. These techniques help capture the potential of emerging technologies for regulatory compliance and provide a means to capture learnings and improve RegTech. RegTech can be extremely effective in reducing regulatory burdens, especially in complex regulatory environments. It is important not to overcomplicate regulatory processes where they are functioning; prioritize deploying RegTech in key industries or products/services that will benefit from its application. To name but a few, lowering the cost of compliance or increasing reporting transparency.Find the opportunity areas 4.2 –Many dif ferent regulations/standards –Complex sets of r egulations/standards –New standar ds being created or applied –Costly compliance checks/pr ocesses –Pr ecise reporting requirements –High compliance risks –Uncertainty due to fr equent changes to regulations/standards – Uncertainty due to changing sector/industry conditionsHigh potential applications of RegT ech exist when an industry or product/service has: Regulatory Technology for the 21st Century 18
Rising compliance costs made innovative  technologies a natural solution to reduce costs. RegTech uses technologies, such as cloud computing, big data and artificial intelligence, to meet regulatory compliance while automating   parts of the process. Identifying the most suitable technology  solutions for a given regulatory process requires identifying the opportunity area and understanding: – Where frictions ar e in the regulatory process (e.g. the execution stage, reporting stage)– What the nature of these frictions is (e.g. information asymmetry, data consistency) – What processes could be impr oved to remove such frictions (e.g. automation, data security) Being aware of these points, one can broach       the question of which technological solution is  most applicable.  While not exhaustive, some examples of RegTech  applications are provided below in Table 1. These examples can be considered individually, but are often most impactful when used in combination.Choose the technology solution 4.3 Regulatory technologies and potential applications TABLE 1 Automated processing of new regulations Reducing manual, human tasksProviding easy regulatory advice Tracking and verifying data Legislation scanning, information management, labellingIdentifying relevant regulations Prioritizing and optimizing reporting, Horizon scanningAnalysis and synthesis of data for reporting Effective data management and storage Identify verificationSearch functions Machine learningBig data Cloud-based platforms Surveillance/image recognitionMachine readable code (Robotic) process automationChatbots Blockchain/distributed ledger technology Natural language processingTechnology Example applications The biggest barrier to RegTech is the  deployment. Given the size and complexity of  regulation, improving regulation without significant  reforms may appear an insurmountable effort.  However, the aim of RegTech is not to upend or  rewrite the entire compliance frameworks. It is to  work with existing systems and drive  improvement from the bottom up. As outlined by the case studies, there are several  key areas of an experiment (e.g., a pilot,  sandbox) to consider which map to the common  success factors identified. Experiment with RegTech applications 4.4 Regulatory Technology for the 21st Century 19Engagement Engagement is an ongoing process – before,  during and after a RegTech experiment. It requires collaboration and engagement with all relevant stakeholders, an in-depth understanding of current and potential institutional structures, and identification of appropriate teams and resources.
Design Among other things, a RegTech experiment  requires clear objectives (i.e. the challenge), application criteria, guidance and supervision, connections with auditors, feedback mechanisms, and defined monitoring and evaluation parameters. – Radical user centricity – leveraging product and service-centred design thinking – Regulation for risk, safety and mitigation – transitioning from the “regulate-and-forget’’ to the “adaptand-learn” approach – Dynamic–nurturing experimentation, iteration and prototypingCase-study success factor s: Application Engagement is an ongoing process – before, during and after a RegTech experiment. It requires collaboration and engagement with all relevant stakeholders, an in-depth understanding of current and potential institutional structures, and identification of appropriate teams and resources. –Human and machine intelligence: Balance qualitative (human) and quantitative (machine) insights sopolicy-making stays in front of cultural change.Case-study success factors: Below: @gremlin/ Gettyimages Regulatory Technology for the 21st Century 20–Public-private partnerships 2.0 (PPP 2.0): Designing with partners, not for partners –Stakeholder capitalism-led: focused on creating long-term value for all those involved –Champion-driven trust: Including “champions” to help drive adoptionCase-study success factor s:
Learn Learn from experience of others across industry and internationally; understand the options, applications and implications of different technologiesConsultGenerate buy-in from close stakeholders; consult industry and organisational staff; co-design the augmentation processEngageDeep industry and/or cross sector engagement; consider international systems and regulatory requirements; promote a cultural change to support broader RegTech adoption  ExperimentEmbracing an agile approach to regulation more broadly; identify opportunities to conduct small-scale tests and experiments with technologyAugment Systematically incorporate RegTech to existing processes; focus on promoting outcomes-based regulation; validate the use of RegTech toolsScaleIdentify opportunities for system transformation; continuously measure and improve impacts; couple with RegTech applications with regulatory reviewAssessDetermine the regulatory problems that need to be addressed, e.g. inefficient or costly processesScanMonitor for disruptive innovations and trends; identify changing user groups and technology applications; develop a range of options, including and excluding RegTech solutionsInvest Allocate resources and funding into building capacity, technological and expertise, and into emerging tools and supporting infrastructurePrioritize the RegTech applications 4.5 The benefits of RegTech are attractive. However,  it may not always be the best solution. This is due to various reasons including cost, capacity, technical complexity and/or legal constraints. When the context is well defined, the advantage of RegTech applications is clear. Therefore, governments  and organizations should build the right environment which enables the use of RegTech when the benefits are clear against alternatives.  What governments and organizations need to consider to prioritize the  deployment of RegTech?TABLE 2 Present Immediate future For the future Regulatory Technology for the 21st Century 21
Final remarks5 The adoption of RegTech cannot occur without  further rethinking of the regulatory environment.  Regardless of the technologies adopted, regulation  must not remain a static exercise on checking  boxes. Gone is the deterministic approach to  regulations where governments only ask what can  go wrong and what are the consequences. Instead,  a probabilistic, performance-based approach –  entertaining the evolution of new economic or social  scenarios, new technologies and new business  models – is required to future-proof regulation and  the technologies deployed.The success of RegTech and agile governance is codependent, often with no “best” or “final” solution.  RegTech is necessary to standardize, automate  and streamline the regulatory process in support  of agility. Agile governance ensures that regulation  is designed and deployed in a way that maximizes  the potential of RegTech. The first step towards  adoption is to acknowledge that the combination  of RegTech and agile governance does not require  upending or rewriting entire regulatory frameworks.  It entails bringing a more incremental and iterative  experimental mindset to begin this journey. Below: @PeopleImages/ Gettyimages Regulatory Technology for the 21st Century 22
Contributors AcknowledgementsGlobal Future Council on Agile  Governance   Kirk Bresniker Fellow and Chief Architect, Hewlett Packard Labs,  Hewlett Packard Enterprise Roslyn Docktor Vice-President, Technology and Science Policy,  Vice-President, Middle East and Africa, IBM  Government and Regulatory Affairs William Eggers Executive Director, Deloitte Center for Government  Insights, Deloitte  Victoria Espinel President and Chief Executive Officer, BSA-The  Software Alliance Stefanie M. Falconi Co-Founder, Instituto Limite Robb Henzi Senior Vice-President, Strategy and Head of  Policy & Philanthropy Practice, sparks & honey,  Omnicom Group Inc. Paul Klimos Senior Associate, Orrick, Herrington & Sutcliffe Aaron Maniam Deputy Secretary for Industry and Information,  Ministry of Communications and Information of  Singapore Diana Paredes Chief Executive Officer and Co-Founder, Suade Landry Signe Managing Director and Professor, Thunderbird  School of Global Management; Senior Fellow,  Global Economy and Development Programme,  Brookings Institution; Distinguished Fellow,  Stanford University World Economic Forum Rebecca King  Government Affairs Lead, C4IR   Loren Newman  Government Affairs Lead, C4IR  We thank additional members of the Global Future  Council on Agile Governance for their insights,  comments and support for the development of  this report. Regulatory Technology for the 21st Century 23
World Economic Forum 91–93 route de la Capite CH-1223 Cologny/Geneva Switzerland   Tel.:  +41 (0) 22 869 1212 Fax: +41 (0) 22 786 2744 contact@weforum.org www.weforum.orgThe World Economic Forum,  committed to improving   the state of the world, is the  International Organization for  Public-Private Cooperation.   The Forum engages the  foremost political, business   and other leaders of society   to shape global, regional  and industry agendas.
